                                                       The Tactician (extended version)?
                                         A Seamless, Interactive Tactic Learner and Prover for Coq

                                                    Lasse Blaauwbroek1,2 , Josef Urban1 , and Herman Geuvers2
                                                         1
                                                             Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
                                                             2
                                                              Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
                                                  lasse@blaauwbroek.eu, josef.urban@gmail.com, herman@cs.ru.nl
arXiv:2008.00120v1 [cs.AI] 31 Jul 2020




                                                 Abstract. We present Tactician, a tactic learner and prover for the
                                                 Coq Proof Assistant. Tactician helps users make tactical proof decisions
                                                 while they retain control over the general proof strategy. To this end,
                                                 Tactician learns from previously written tactic scripts and gives users
                                                 either suggestions about the next tactic to be executed or altogether
                                                 takes over the burden of proof synthesis. Tactician’s goal is to provide
                                                 users with a seamless, interactive, and intuitive experience together with
                                                 robust and adaptive proof automation. In this paper, we give an overview
                                                 of Tactician from the user’s point of view, regarding both day-to-day
                                                 usage and issues of package dependency management while learning in
                                                 the large. Finally, we give a peek into Tactician’s implementation as a
                                                 Coq plugin and machine learning platform.

                                                 Keywords: Interactive Theorem Proving · Tactical Learning · Machine
                                                 Learning · Coq Proof Assistant · Proof Synthesis · System Overview


                                         1     Introduction
                                         The Coq Proof Assistant [31] is an Interactive Theorem Prover in which one
                                         proves lemmas using tactic scripts. Individual tactics in these scripts represent
                                         actions that transform the proof state of the lemma currently being proved. A
                                         wide range of tactics exist, with a wide range of sophistication. Basic tactics
                                         such as apply lem and rewrite lem use an existing lemma lem to perform one
                                         specific inference or rewriting step while tactics like ring and tauto implement
                                         entire decision procedures that are guaranteed to succeed within specific domains.
                                         Finally, open-ended search procedures are implemented by tactics like auto and
                                         firstorder. They can be used in almost every domain but usually only work on
                                         simple proof states or need to be calibrated carefully. Users are also encouraged to
                                         define new tactics that represent basic steps, decision procedures, or specialized
                                         search procedures within their specific mathematical domain.
                                             When proving a lemma, the user’s challenge is to observe the current proof
                                         state and select the appropriate tactic and its arguments to be used. Often the
                                         ?
                                             This work was supported by the European Regional Development Fund under the
                                             project AI&Reasoning (reg. no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000466) and by the
                                             AI4REASON ERC Consolidator grant nr. 649043.
2                               L. Blaauwbroek et al.

user makes this decision based on experience with previous proofs. If the current
proof state is similar to a previously encountered situation, then one can expect
that an effective tactic in that situation might also be effective now. Hence, the
user is continuously matching patterns of proof states in their mind and selects
the correct tactic based on these matches.
    That is not the only task the user performs, however. When working on a
mathematical development, the user generally has two roles: (1) As a strategist,
the user comes up with appropriate lemmas and sometimes decides on the main
structure of complicated proofs. (2) As a tactician, the user performs the long
and somewhat mindless process of mental pattern matching on proof states,
applying corresponding tactics until the lemma is proved. Many of the steps in
the tactician’s role will be considered as “obvious” by a mathematician. Our
system is meant to replicate the pattern matching process performed in this role,
alleviating the user from this burden. Hence, we have aptly named it Tactician.
    To perform its job, Tactician can learn from existing proofs, by looking at
how tactics modify the proof state. Then, when proving a new lemma, the user
can ask the system to recommend previously used tactics based on the current
proof state and even to complete the whole proof using a search procedure based
on these tactic recommendations.
    In our previous publication, the underlying machine learning and proof search
techniques employed by Tactician and how suitable data is extracted from Coq
are described [2]. It also contains an evaluation of Tactician’s current proof
automation performance on Coq’s standard library. We will not repeat these
details here. Instead, we will focus on the operational aspects and description
of Tactician when used as a working and research tool. Section 2 gives a mostly
non-technical overview of the system suitable for casual Coq users. That includes
Tactician’s design principles, its mode of operation, a concrete example and
a discussion on using Tactician in large projects. Section 3 briefly discusses
some of Tactician’s technical implementation issues, and Section 4 describes how
Tactician can be used as a machine learning platform. Finally, Section 6 compares
Tactician to related work. Installation instructions of Tactician can be found at
the project’s website http://coq-tactician.github.io. This pre-print is an
extended version of our CICM paper with the same title [3].

2     System Overview
In this section, we give a mostly non-technical overview of Tactician suitable
for casual Coq users. Section 2.1 states the guiding design principles of the
project, and Section 2.2 describes the resulting user workflow. On the practical
side, Section 2.3 gives a simple, concrete example of Tactician’s usage, while
Section 2.4 discusses how to employ Tactician in large projects.

2.1   Design Principles
For our system, we start with the principal goal of learning from previous proofs
to aid the user with proving new lemmas. In Coq, there are essentially two notions
                                            The Tactician (extended version)       3

of proof: (1) proof terms expressed in the Gallina language (Coq’s version of the
Calculus of Inductive Constructions [24]); (2) tactic proof scripts written by the
user that can then generate a Gallina term. In principle, it is possible to use
machine learning on both notions of proof. We have chosen to learn from tactic
proof scripts for two reasons:

 1. Tactics scripts are a higher-level and forgiving environment, which is more
    suitable for machine learning. A Gallina proof term must be generated
    extremely precisely while a tactic script often still works after minor local
    mutations have occurred. Gallina terms are also usually much bigger than
    their corresponding tactic script because individual tactics can represent
    large steps in a proof.
 2. We acknowledge that automation systems within a proof assistant often still
    need input from the user to fully prove a lemma. Working on the tactic level
    allows the user to introduce domain-specific information to aid the system.
    For example, one can write new tactics that represent decision procedures and
    heuristics that solve problems Tactician could not otherwise solve. One can
    teach Tactician about such new tactics merely by using them in hand-written
    proofs a couple of times, after which the system will automatically start to
    use them.

    Apart from the principal goal described above, the most important objective
of Tactician is to be usable and remain usable by actual Coq users. Hence, we
prioritize the system’s “look and feel” over its hard performance numbers. To
achieve this usability, Tactician needs to be pleasant to all parties involved, which
we express in four basic “friendliness” tenets.

User Friendly If the system is to be used by actual Coq users, it should function
   as seamlessly as possible. After installation, it should be ready to go with
   minimal configuration and without needing to spend countless hours training
   a sophisticated machine learning model. Instead, there should be a model
   that can learn on the fly, with a future possibility to add a more sophisticated
   model that can be trained in batch once a development has been finished.
   Finally, all interaction with the system should happen within the standard
   Coq environment, regardless of which editor is used and without the need to
   execute custom scripts.
Installation Friendly Ease of installation is essential to reach solid user adop-
   tion. To facilitate this, the system should be implemented in Ocaml (Coq’s
   implementation language), with no dependencies on machine learning toolkits
   written in other languages like Python or Matlab. Compilation and installa-
   tion will then be just as easy as with a regular Coq release.
Integration Friendly The system should not be a fork of the main Coq code-
   base that has to be maintained separately. A fork would deter users from
   installing it and risk falling behind the upstream code. Instead, it should
   function as a plugin that can be compiled separately and then loaded into
   Coq by the user.
4                                 L. Blaauwbroek et al.

Maintenance Friendly We intend for Tactician not to become abandonware
  after main development has ceased, and at least remain compatible with the
  newest release of Coq. As a first step, the plugin should be entered into the
  Coq Package Index [30], enabling continuous integration with future versions
  of Coq. Additionally, assuming that Tactician becomes wildly popular, we
  eventually intend for it to be absorbed into the main Coq codebase.

2.2   Mode of Operation
Analogously to Coq’s mode of operation, Tactician can function both in interactive
mode and in compilation mode.

Interactive Mode We illustrate the interactive mode of operation of Tactician
using the schematic in Figure 1. When the user starts a new Coq development
file—say X.v—the first thing Tactician does is create an (in-memory) empty
tactic database X corresponding to this file. The user then starts to prove lemmas
as usual. Behind the scenes, every executed tactic, e.g. tactica1 , is saved into the
database accompanied by the proof states before and after tactic execution, in
this case, hΓa1 ` σ1 , tactica1 , Γa2 ` σ2 i. The difference between these two states
represents the action performed by the tactic, while the state before the tactic
represents the context in which it was useful. By recording many such triples
for a tactic, we create a dataset representing an approximation of that tactic’s
semantic meaning. The database is kept synchronized with the user’s movement
within the document throughout the entire interactive session.
    After proving a few lemmas by hand, the user can start to reap the fruits
of the database. For this, the tactics suggest and search are available. We
illustrate their use in the schematic when “Lemma z : ω” is being proven. The
user first executes two normal tactics. After that, Coq’s proof state window
displays a state for which the user is unsure what tactic to use. Here Tactician’s
tactics come in.
suggest This tactic can be executed to ask Tactician for a list of recommenda-
   tions. The current proof state A : γ1 , B : γ2 , . . . , Z : γn ` ω3 is fed into the
   pattern matching engine, which will perform a comparison with the states
   in the tactic database. From this, an ordered list of recommendations is
   generated and displayed in Coq’s messages window, where the user can select
   a tactic to execute.
search Alternatively, the system can be asked to search for a complete proof.
   We start with the current proof state, which we rename to Φ1 ` ρ1 for clarity.
   Then a search tree is formed by repeatedly running suggest on the proof
   state and executing the suggested tactics. This tree can be traversed in
   various ways, finishing only when a complete proof has been found.
   If a proof is found, two things happen. (1) The Gallina proof term that is
   found is immediately submitted to Coq’s proof engine, after which the proof
   can be closed with Qed. (2) Tactician generates a reconstruction tactic search
   failing ht12 , t32 , ...i which is displayed to the user (see the bottom of the
                                                       The Tactician (extended version)                   5

                                   Coq Document X.v                 Tactic Database X

                                     Lemma a : σ
                                       tactica1 .                    hΓa1 ` σ1 , tactica1 , Γa2 ` σ2 i
                                       tactica2 .                    hΓa2 ` σ2 , tactica2 , Γa3 ` σ3 i

                                       tactican .                    hΓan ` σn , tactican , · ` · i
                                       Qed.


                                     Lemma b : τ
                                       tacticb1 .                    hΓb1 ` τ1 , tacticb1 , Γb2 ` τ2 i
                                       tacticb2 .                    hΓb2 ` τ2 , tacticb2 , Γb3 ` τ3 i
Proof State
                                       tacticbn .                    hΓbn ` τn , tacticbn , · ` · i
  A : γ1
                                       Qed.
  B : γ2

  Z : γn
  ω3                                 Lemma z : ω
                                       tacticz1 .                    hΓz1 ` ω1 , tacticz1 , Γz2 ` ω2 i
Messages                               tacticz2 .                    hΓz2 ` ω2 , tacticz2 , Γz2 ` ω3 i
                                       suggest.
  Suggestions:
                                       search.
  tacticp6 .
                                       Qed.
  tacticu12 .

  tacticf 2 .                                                              Pattern Matching
                                 A : γ1 , B : γ2 , . . . , Z : γn ` ω 3



                                              Φ1 ` ρ1
                                              suggest
                                          t11 ,t12 ,. . . ,t
                                                          ,t1n
                                                             1n




     Φ2 ` ρ2                                  Φ3 ` ρ2                                Φm ` ρm
     suggest                                  suggest                                  suggest
 t21 ,t22 ,. . . ,t
                 ,t2n
                    2n                    t31 ,t32 ,. . . ,t
                                                          ,t3n
                                                             3n                   tm1 ,tm2 ,. . . ,t
                                                                                                  ,tmn
                                                                                                     mn




                                                 ·`·


                     Reconstruction tactic: search failing ht12 , t32 , . . .i.

Fig. 1. A schematic overview of Tactician in its interactive mode of operation.
6                                    L. Blaauwbroek et al.

      figure). The purpose of this tactic is to provide a modification resilient proof
      cache that also functions when Tactician is not installed. Its semantics is to
      first try to use the previously found list of tactics ht12 , t32 , ...i to complete the
      proof immediately. “Failing” that (presumably due to changes in definitions
      or lemmas), a new search is initiated to recover the proof. To use the cache,
      the user should copy it and replace the original search invocation with it in
      the source file.



                                 Database X                    Database Y
                                                                Inherits Database X


    Document X.v           rebuild                  include    Document Y.v
                              coqc X.v           X.vo           Require X.
                             compilation      binary file


    Fig. 2. A schematic overview of Tactician in its compilation mode of operation.


Compilation Mode This mode is visualized in Figure 2. After the file X.v has
been finished, one might want to depend on it in other files. This requires the file
to be compiled into a binary X.vo file. The compilation is performed using the
command coqc X.v. Tactician is integrated into this process. During compilation,
the tactic database is rebuilt in the same way as in interactive mode and then
included in the .vo file. When development X.v is then Required by another
development file Y.v, the tactic database of X.v is automatically inherited.

2.3     A Concrete Example
We now give a simple example use-case based on lists. Starting with an empty
file, Tactician is immediately ready for action. We proceed as usual by giving a
standard inductive definition of lists of numbers with their corresponding notation
and a function for concatenation.
Inductive list :=
| nil : list
| cons : nat -> list -> list.
Notation "[]"      := nil.
Notation "x :: ls" := (cons x ls).

Fixpoint concat ls1 ls2 :=
match ls1 with
| []       => ls2
| x::ls1 ' => x::(ls1 ' ++ ls2 )
end where "ls1 ++ ls2 " := (concat ls1 ls2 ).
                                           The Tactician (extended version)       7

We wish to prove some standard properties of concatenation. The first is a lemma
stating that the empty list [] is the right identity of concatenation (the left
identity is trivial).
Lemma concat_nil_r : ∀ ls, ls ++ [] = ls.

With Tactician installed, we immediately have access to the new tactics suggest
and search. Neither tactic will produce a result when used now since the system
has not had a chance to learn from proofs yet. Therefore, we will have to prove
this lemma by hand.
Proof.
intros. induction ls.
- simpl. reflexivity.
- simpl. f_equal. apply IHls.
Qed.

The system has immediately learned from this proof (it was even learning during
the proof) and is now ready to help us with a proof of the associativity of
concatenation.
Lemma concat_assoc :
  ∀ ls1 ls2 ls3 , (ls ++ ls2 ) ++ ls3 = ls ++ (ls2 ++ ls3 ).

Now, if we execute suggest, it outputs the ordered list intros, simpl, f equal,
reflexivity. Indeed, using intros as our next tactic is not unreasonable. We
can repeatedly ask suggest for a recommendation after every tactic we input,
which sometimes gives us good tactics and sometimes bad tactics. However,
we can also eliminate the middle-man and execute the search tactic, which
immediately finds a proof.
Proof. search. Qed.

To cache the proof that is found for the future, we can copy-paste the reconstruc-
tion tactic that Tactician prints into the source file. This example shows how the
system can quickly learn from very little data and with minimal effort from the
user. Of course, this also scales to much bigger developments.
    We continue our example for more advanced Coq users to showcase how
Tactician can learn to use custom domain-specific tactics. We begin by defining
an inductive property encoding that one list is a non-contiguous sublist of another.
Inductive sublist : list -> list -> Prop :=
| sl_nil : sublist [] []
| sl_cons1 ls1 ls2 n : sublist ls1 ls2 -> sublist ls1 (n::ls2 )
| sl_cons2 ls1 ls2 n : sublist ls1 ls2 -> sublist (n::ls1 ) (n::ls2 ).

We now wish to prove that some lists have the sublist property. For example,
sublist (9::3::[]) (4::7::9::3::[]). Deciding this is not entirely trivial,
because it is not possible to judge from the head of the list whether to apply
sl cons1 or sl cons2 . Instead of manually writing these proofs, we create a
domain-specific, heuristic proving tactic that automatically tries to find a proof.
8                                 L. Blaauwbroek et al.

Ltac solve_sublist := solve [match goal with
| |- sublist [] [] => apply sl_nil
| |- sublist (_::_) [] => fail
| |- sublist _ _ =>
       (apply sl_cons1 + apply sl_cons2 ); solve_sublist
| |- _ => solve [auto]
end].

This tactic looks at the current proof state and checks that the goal is of the
form sublist ls1 ls2 . If the lists are empty, it can be finished using sl nil.
If ls2 is empty but ls1 nonempty, the postfix is unprovable, and the tactic
fails. In all other cases, we initiate a backtracking search where we try to apply
either sl cons1 or sl cons2 and recurse. Finally, we add a simple catch-all clause
that tries to prove any side-conditions using Coq’s built-in auto. We now teach
Tactician about the existence of our previous lemmas and the domain-specific
tactic by defining some simple examples. Finally, we ask Tactician to solve a
more complicated, compound problem.
Lemma ex1 : sublist (9::3::[]) (4::7::9::3::[]).
Proof. solve_sublist. Qed.

Lemma ex2 : ∀ ls, 1::2::ls ++ [] = 1::2::ls.
Proof. intro. rewrite concat_nil_r. reflexivity. Qed.

Lemma dec2 : ∀ ls1 ls2 , sublist ls1 ls2 ->
  sublist (7::9::13::ls1 ) (8::5::7::[] ++ 9::13::ls2 ++ []).
Proof. search. Qed.

The proof found by Tactician is rewrite concat nil r;intros;solve sublist.
It has automatically figured out that it needs to introduce the hypothesis,
normalize the list and then run the domain-specific prover. This example is
somewhat contrived but should illustrate how the user can easily teach Tactician
domain-specific knowledge.


2.4   Learning and Proving in the Large

The examples above are fun to play with and useful for demonstration purposes.
However, when using Tactician to develop real projects, three main issues need
to be taken care of, namely (1) instrumenting dependencies, (2) instrumenting
the standard library and, (3) reproducible builds. Below, we describe how to use
Tactician in complex projects and, in particular, how these issues are solved.
    Tactician itself is a collection of easily installed Opam [12] packages distributed
through the Coq Package Index [30]. The package coq-tactician provides the
main functionality. It needs to be installed to run the examples of Section 2.3.
These examples have no dependencies and make minimal use of Coq’s standard
library. All learning is done within one file, making them a simple use-case.
Things become more complicated when one starts to use the standard library and
libraries defined in external dependencies. Although Tactician will keep working
                                           The Tactician (extended version)       9

normally in those situations, by default, it does not learn from proofs in these
libraries. Hence, Tactician’s ability to synthesize proofs for lemmas concerning
the domain of those libraries will be severely limited.
    The main question to remedy this situation is where Tactician should get its
learning data from. As explained in Section 2.2, Tactician saves the tactic database
of a library in the compiled .vo binaries. This database becomes available as
soon as the compiled library is loaded. However, this only works if the library was
compiled with Tactician enabled, which is the case neither for Coq’s standard
library nor most external packages. Hence, we need to instrument these libraries
by recompiling them while Tactician is loaded. Loading Tactician amounts to
finding a way of convincing Coq to pre-load the library Tactician.Ltac1.Record
before starting the compilation process.

External Dependency Instrumentation An external dependency can be any
collection of Coq source files together with an arbitrary build system. Injecting
the loading of Tactician.Ltac1.Record into the build process automatically
is not possible in general. However, we do provide a simple solution for the
most common situation. Coq provides package developers with a utility called
coq makefile that automatically generates a Makefile to build and install their
files. This build system is usually packaged up with Opam to be released on the
Coq Package Index. Although this package index does not require packages to
use coq makefile, most do this in practice.
     Makefiles generated by coq makefile are highly customizable through envi-
ronment variables. Tactician provides command-line utilities called tactician
enable and tactician disable that configure Opam to automatically inject
Tactician through these environment variables. When building packages without
Opam, the user can modify the environment by running eval $(tactician
inject) before building. This solution will suffice to instrument most packages
created using coq makefile, as long as authors do not customize the resulting
build file too heavily. We will add support for Coq’s new Dune build system [16]
when it has stabilized. For more stubborn packages, rather aggressive methods
of injecting Tactician are also possible but, in general, packages that circum-
vent instrumentation are always possible. Therefore, we do not provide built-in
solutions for those cases.

Standard Library Instrumentation In order to instrument Coq’s standard
library, it also needs to be recompiled with Tactician.Ltac1.Record pre-loaded.
We provide the Opam package coq-tactician-stdlib for this purpose. This
package does not contain any code, but simply takes the source files of the
installed standard library and recompiles them. It then promptly commits the
Cardinal Sin of Package Management by overwriting the original binary .vo files
of the standard library. We defend this choice by noting that (1) the original files
will be backed up and restored when coq-tactician-stdlib is removed and
(2) the alternative of installing the recompiled standard library in a secondary
location is even worse. This choice would cause a rift in the users local ecosystem
10                               L. Blaauwbroek et al.

of packages, with some packages relying on the original standard library and some
on the recompiled one. Coq will refuse to load two packages from the rivaling
ecosystems citing “incompatible assumptions over the standard library,” forever
setting them apart.
    Even with our choice of overwriting the standard library, an ecosystem rift
still occurs if packages depending on Coq already pre-existed. To resolve this,
Tactician ships with the command-line utility tactician recompile that helps
the user find and recompile these packages.


Tactician Usage within Packages In order to use Tactician’s suggest and
search tactics, the library Tactician.Ltac1.Tactics needs to be loaded. How-
ever, we strongly advise against loading this library directly, for two reasons. (1)
If a development X that uses Tactician is submitted to the Coq Package Index as
coq-x, an explicit dependency on coq-tactician is needed. This dependency
can be undesirable due to users potentially being unwilling to install Tactician.
(2) It would undermine the build reproducibility of the package. Even though
coq-tactician would be installed as a dependency when coq-x is installed,
there is no way to ensure that Tactician has instrumented the other dependencies
of the package. Hence, it is likely that Tactician will be operating with a smaller
tactic database, reducing its ability to prove lemmas automatically.
     Instead, the package coq-x should depend on coq-tactician-dummy. This
package is extremely simple, containing one 30-line library called Tactician.
Ltac1Dummy. It provides alternative versions of Tactician tactics that act as
dummies of the real version. Tactics suggest and search will not perform any
action. However, tactic search failing h...i, described in Section 2.2, will
still be able to complete a proof using its cache (but without the ability to search
for new proofs in case of failure). A released package can thus only employ cached
searches. This way, any build will be reproducible.
     During development, the real version of Tactician should be loaded to gain
its full power. Instead of loading it explicitly through a Require in source files,
we recommend that users load it through the coqrc file. Coq will automatically
process any vernacular defined in this file at startup. The command-line utility
tactician enable will assist in adding the correct vernacular to the coqrc file.



3    Technical Implementation

In this section, we provide a peek behind the curtains of Tactician’s technical
implementation and how it is integrated with Coq. A previous publication already
covers the following aspects of Tactician [2]: (1) The machine learning models
used to suggest tactics; (2) an explanation of how data extracted from Coq is
decomposed and transformed for these models; and (3) the search procedure to
synthesize new proofs. These details are therefore omitted here.
                                            The Tactician (extended version)       11

3.1   Intercepting Tactics

Tactician is implemented as a plugin that provides a new proof mode (tactic
language) to Coq. This proof mode contains precisely the same syntactical
elements as the Ltac1 tactic language [9]. The purpose of the proof mode is to
intercept and decompose executed tactics and save them in Tactician’s database.
After interception, the tactics are redirected back to the regular Ltac1 engine.
By loading the library Tactician.Ltac1.Record, this proof mode is activated
instead of the regular Ltac1 language.
    Note that Ltac1 is the most popular but by no means the only tactic language
for Coq [17,23,13,25]. All these languages are compiled into a proof monad
implemented on the OCaml level [20]. It would be preferable to instrument the
proof monad directly as this would enable us to record tactics from all languages
at once. It appears that this is impossible, though, because the structure of the
monadic interface does not allow us to recover high-level tactical units such as
decision procedures, even when implemented as the most general Free Monad.
As such, Tactician only supports Ltac1 at the moment. In the future, we intent
to provide improved support for SSreflect [13] and support for recording the new
Ltac2 language [25].


3.2   State Synchronization

When recording tactics in interactive mode, it is important to synchronize the
tactic database with the undo/redo actions of the user, both from a theoretical
and practical perspective. In theory, if a user undoes a proof step, this represents a
mistake made by the user, meaning that the recorded information in the database
is also a mistake. In practice, keeping such information will lead to problems
in compilation mode because the database will be smaller due to the lack of
undo/redo actions. Therefore searches that succeeded in interactive mode may
not succeed in compilation mode. Below, we explain how Coq and Tactician deal
with state synchronization.
    Internally, Coq ships with a state manager that keeps track of all state
information generated when vernacular commands are executed. This information
includes, for example, definitions, proofs, and custom tactic definitions. This
data is automatically synchronized with the user’s interactive movement through
the document, and saved to the binary .vo file during compilation. All data
structures registered with the state manager are expected to be persistent (in the
functional programming sense [10]). The copy-on-write semantics of such data
structures allow the state manager to easily keep a history of previous versions
and revert to them on demand.
    For Tactician, registering data structures with the state manager to ensure
proper synchronization is awkward, because the state manager assumes that
tactics have no side-effects outside of modifications to the proof state. Hence, any
data registered with the state manager is discarded as soon as the current proof
has been finished. Tactician solves this by tricking Coq into thinking that tactics
are side-effecting vernacular commands, convincing it to re-execute all tactics at
12                               L. Blaauwbroek et al.

Qed time to properly register the side-effects. However, as a consequence, these
tactics will modify the proof state a second time, at a time when this is not
intended. This is a likely source of future bugs for which a permanent solution is
yet to be found.


4    Tactician as a Machine Learning Platform

Apart from serving as a tool for end-users, Tactician also functions as a machine
learning platform. A simple OCaml interface to add a new learning model to
Tactician is provided. The learning task of the model is to predict a list of
tactics for a given proof state. When registering a new model, Tactician will
automatically take advantage of it during proof search. Our interface hides Coq’s
internal complexities while being as general as possible. We encourage everyone
to implement their favorite learning technique and try to beat the built-in model.
Tactician’s performance can easily be benchmarked on the standard library and
other packages. The signature of a machine learning model is as follows:
type sentence = Node of string * sentence list
type proof_state =
{ hypotheses : (id * sentence) list
; goal       : sentence }

type tactic
val tactic_sentence : tactic -> sentence
val local_variables : tactic -> id list
val substitute      : tactic -> id_map -> tactic

module type TacticianModelType = sig
  type t
  val create : unit -> t
  val add : t -> before:proof_state -> tactic -> after:proof_state -> t
  val predict : t -> proof_state -> (float * tactic) list
end
val register_learner : string -> (module TacticianLearnerType) -> unit

    A sentence is a very general tree data type able to encode all of Coq’s internal
syntax trees, such as those of terms and tactics. Node names of syntax trees are
converted into strings. This way, most semantic information is preserved using
a much simpler data type that is suitable for most machine learning techniques.
Proof states are encoded as a list of named hypothesis sentences and a goal
sentence. In this case, sentences represent a Gallina term. We abstract from some
of Coq’s proof state complexities such as the shelf and the unification map.
    Tactician represents tactics as an abstract type that can be inspected as
a sentence using tactic sentence. Since the goal of this interface is to predict
tactics but not synthesize tactics, it is not possible to modify them (this would
seriously complicate the interface). There is one exception. We provide a way
to extract a list of variables that refer to the local context of a proof. The local
                                           The Tactician (extended version)    13

variables of a tactic can also be updated using a simultaneous substitution. Such
substitutions will allow for a limited form of parameter prediction.
    We think that local variable prediction is the only kind of parameter pre-
diction that makes sense in Tactician’s context. The only other major classes
of parameters are global lemma names and complete Gallina terms. Predicting
complete terms is known to be very difficult and would unnecessarily complicate
the interface. Predicting names of global lemmas is possible, but does not appear
to be very useful because lemma names are almost always directly associated
with basic tactics like apply lem or rewrite lem. Predicting parameters for
these tactics is counter-productive because their semantics are mostly dependent
on the definition of the lemma. Hence, it is better to view the incarnations of
such tactics with different lemmas as arguments as completely separate tactics.
    Finally, implementing a learning model entails implementing the module type
TacticianModelType and registering it with Tactician. This module requires
an implementation of a database type t. For reasons explained in Section 3.2,
this database needs to be persistent. Tactician will add tactics to the database,
together with the proof state before and after the tactic was applied. The
machine learning task of the model is to predict a weighted list of tactics that
are likely applicable to a previously unseen proof state.
    The current interface only allows for models that support online learning
because database entries are added one by one in interactive mode. We justify this
by the user-friendliness requirements from Section 2.1. However, we realize that
together with the persistence requirement, this places considerable limitations on
the kind of learning models that can be employed. In the future, we intent to
support a secondary interface that can be used to create offline models employing
batch learning on large Coq packages in its entirety.


5     Case Study

The overall performance of our tactical search on the full Coq Standard Library is
reported in a previous publication [2], which also reports performance on various
parts of the library. The best-performing version of our learning model can prove
34.0% of the library lemmas when using a 40s time limit. Six different versions
together prove 39.3%. The union with all CoqHammer methods achieves 56.7%.3
     Here we show an example of a nontrivial proof found by Tactician. The system
was asked to automatically find the proof of the following lemma from the library
file Structures/GenericMinMax.v,4 where facts about general definitions of min
and max are proved.

Lemma max_min_antimono f :
 Proper (eq==>eq) f -> Proper (le==>flip le) f ->
 forall x y, max (f x) (f y) == f (min x y).

3
    CoqHammer’s eight methods prove together 40.8%, with the best proving 28.8%.
4
    https://coq.inria.fr/library/Coq.Structures.GenericMinMax.html
14                               L. Blaauwbroek et al.

Tactician’s learning model evaluated the following two lemmas as similar to what
has to be proven:
Lemma min_mono f :
   (Proper (eq ==> eq) f) -> (Proper (le ==> le) f) ->
   forall x y, min (f x) (f y) == f (min x y).
 intros Eqf Lef x y.
 destruct (min_spec x y) as [(H,E)|(H,E)]; rewrite E;
  destruct (min_spec (f x) (f y)) as [(H',E')|(H',E')]; auto.
 - assert (f x <= f y) by (apply Lef; order). order.
 - assert (f y <= f x) by (apply Lef; order). order.
Qed.

Lemma min_max_modular n m p :
   min n (max m (min n p)) == max (min n m) (min n p).
 intros. rewrite <- min_max_distr.
 destruct (min_spec n p) as [(C,E)|(C,E)]; rewrite E; auto with *.
 destruct (max_spec m n) as [(C',E')|(C',E')]; rewrite E'.
 - rewrite 2 min_l; try order. rewrite max_le_iff; right; order.
 - rewrite 2 min_l; try order. rewrite max_le_iff; auto.
Qed.

The trace through the proof search tree that resulted in a proof is as follows:

max_min_antimono      .0.0.0.5.5.2.1.0.5.1.5.1

This trace represents, for every choice point in the search tree, which of suggest’s
ranked suggestion was used to reach the proof. The proof search went into depth
12 and the first three tactics used in the final proof are those with the highest
score as recommended by the learning model, which most likely followed the
proof of min mono. However, after that, it had to diverge from that proof, using
only the sixth-best ranked tactic twice in a row. This nontrivial search continued
for the next seven tactical steps, combining mostly tactics used in the two
lemmas and some other tactics. The search finally yielded the following proof of
max min antimono.
intros Eqf Lef x y. destruct (min_spec x y) as [(H, E)|(H, E)]. rewrite E.
destruct (max_spec (f x) (f y)) as [(H', E')| (H', E')].
assert (f y <= f x) by (apply Lef; order). order. auto. rewrite E.
destruct (max_spec (f x) (f y)) as [(H', E')| (H', E')]. auto.
assert (f x <= f y) by (apply Lef; order). order.

Note that the original proof of the lemma is quite similar, but shorter and without
some redundant steps. Redundant steps are known to happen in systems like
Tactician, such as the TacticToe [11] system for HOL4 [29].
intros Eqf Lef x y. destruct (min_spec x y) as [(H,E)|(H,E)]; rewrite E;
destruct (max_spec (f x) (f y)) as [(H',E')|(H',E')]; auto.
- assert (f y <= f x) by (apply Lef; order). order.
- assert (f x <= f y) by (apply Lef; order). order.
                                           The Tactician (extended version)       15

6   Related Work

There exist quite a few machine learning systems for Coq and other interactive
theorem provers. The most significant distinguishing factor of Tactician to other
systems for Coq is its user-friendliness. There are several other systems that
are interesting, but rather challenging to install and use for end-users. They
often depend on external tools such as machine learning toolkits and automatic
theorem provers. Some systems need a long time to train their machine learning
models—preferably on dedicated hardware. Those are often not geared towards
end-users at all but rather towards the Artificial Intelligence community.
    Tactician takes its main inspiration from the TacticToe [11] system for
HOL4 [29] which learns tactics expressed in the Standard ML language. Us-
ing this knowledge, it can then automatically search for proofs by predicting
tactics and their arguments. Our work is similar both in doing a learning-guided
tactic search and by its complete integration in the underlying proof assistant
without relying on external machine learning libraries and specialized hardware.
    Below is a short list of machine learning systems for the Coq theorem prover.

ML4PG provides tactic suggestions by clustering together various statistics ex-
   tracted from interactive proofs [21]. It is integrated with the Proof General [1]
   proof editor and requires connections to Matlab or Weka.
SEPIA provides proof search using tactic predictions and is also integrated
   with Proof General [14]. Note, however, that its proof search is only based
   on tactic traces and does not make predictions based on the proof state.
Gamepad is a framework that integrates with the Coq codebase and allows
   machine learning to be performed in Python [15]. It uses recurrent neural
   networks to make tactic prediction and to evaluate the quality of a proof
   state. The system is able to synthesize proofs in the domain of algebraic
   rewriting. Gamepad is not geared towards end-users.
CoqGym extracts tactic and proof state information on a large scale and uses it
   to construct a deep learning model capable of generating full tactic scripts [32].
   CoqGym’s evaluation is using a time limit of 600s, which is impractically
   high for Coq practitioners. Still, it is significantly weaker than CoqHammer.
   A probable cause is the slowness of deep neural networks which is common
   to most proving experiments geared towards the deep learning community.
Proverbot9001 is a proof search system for Coq based on a neural architec-
   ture [27]. The system is evaluated on the verified CompCert compiler [22]. It
   is reported that Proverbot9001’s architecture is a significant improvement
   over CoqGym.
CoqHammer is a machine learning and proving tool in the general ham-
   mers [5,18,4,19] category designed for Coq [7]. Hammers capitalize on the
   capabilities of automatic theorem provers [28,8,26] to assist ITP’s. To this
   end, learning-based premise selection is used to translate an ITP problem
   to the ATP’s target language (typically First Order Logic). A proof found
   by the ATP can then be reconstructed in the proof assistant. CoqHammer
   is a maintained system that is well-integrated into Coq and only requires a
16                                L. Blaauwbroek et al.

     connection to an ATP. It has similar performance as Tactician but proves
     different lemmas, making these systems complementary [2].


7    Further Work and Conclusion
We have presented Tactician, a seamless and interactive tactic learner and prover
for Coq. The machine learning perspective has been described in a previous
publication [2]. We showed how Tactician is an easy-to-use tool that can be
employed by the user with minimal installation effort. A clear approach to using
the system in large developments has also been outlined. With its current machine
learning capabilities, we expect Tactician to help the user with its proving efforts
significantly. Finally, we presented a powerful machine learning interface that
will allow researchers to bring their advanced learning models to Coq users
while being isolated from Coq’s internal complexities. We expect this to be of
considerable utility to both the artificial intelligence community and Coq users.
     There are many future research directions. There is a never-ending quest
to improve the built-in learning model. With better features and stronger (but
still fast) learners such as boosted trees (used in ENIGMA-NG [6]) we hope to
push Tactician’s performance over the standard library towards 50%. Apart from
this, we expect to improve support for SSreflect and to introduce support for
the new Ltac2 language. In the future, the machine learning interface will be
expanded to allow for batch learning. Additionally, we would like to incorporate
the tactic history (memory) of the current lemma into the learning model, similar
to SEPIA. Short-term memory will allow Tactician to modify its suggestions
based on the tactics that were previously executed in the current proof.


References
 1. David Aspinall. Proof General: A generic tool for proof development. In Susanne
    Graf and Michael I. Schwartzbach, editors, Tools and Algorithms for Construction
    and Analysis of Systems, 6th International Conference, TACAS 2000, Held as
    Part of the European Joint Conferences on the Theory and Practice of Software,
    ETAPS 2000, Berlin, Germany, March 25 - April 2, 2000, Proceedings, volume
    1785 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 38–42. Springer, 2000. doi:
    10.1007/3-540-46419-0\_3.
 2. Lasse Blaauwbroek, Josef Urban, and Herman Geuvers. Tactic learning and proving
    for the Coq proof assistant. In Elvira Albert and Laura Kovács, editors, LPAR 2020:
    23rd International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence
    and Reasoning, Alicante, Spain, May 22-27, 2020, volume 73 of EPiC Series in
    Computing, pages 138–150. EasyChair, 2020. doi:10.29007/wg1q.
 3. Lasse Blaauwbroek, Josef Urban, and Herman Geuvers. The Tactician - A
    seamless, interactive tactic learner and prover for Coq. In CICM, volume
    12236 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 271–277. Springer, 2020.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-030-53518-6\_17.
 4. Jasmin Christian Blanchette, David Greenaway, Cezary Kaliszyk, Daniel Kühlwein,
    and Josef Urban. A learning-based fact selector for Isabelle/HOL. J. Autom.
    Reasoning, 57(3):219–244, 2016. doi:10.1007/s10817-016-9362-8.
                                           The Tactician (extended version)      17

 5. Jasmin Christian Blanchette, Cezary Kaliszyk, Lawrence C. Paulson, and Josef
    Urban. Hammering towards QED. J. Formalized Reasoning, 9(1):101–148, 2016.
    doi:10.6092/issn.1972-5787/4593.
 6. Karel Chvalovský, Jan Jakubuv, Martin Suda, and Josef Urban. ENIGMA-
    NG: efficient neural and gradient-boosted inference guidance for E. In Pascal
    Fontaine, editor, Automated Deduction - CADE 27 - 27th International Confer-
    ence on Automated Deduction, Natal, Brazil, August 27-30, 2019, Proceedings,
    volume 11716 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 197–215. Springer, 2019.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-030-29436-6\_12.
 7. Lukasz Czajka and Cezary Kaliszyk. Hammer for Coq: Automation for depen-
    dent type theory. J. Autom. Reasoning, 61(1-4):423–453, 2018. doi:10.1007/
    s10817-018-9458-4.
 8. Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver.
    In C. R. Ramakrishnan and Jakob Rehof, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the
    Construction and Analysis of Systems, 14th International Conference, TACAS
    2008, Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice of
    Software, ETAPS 2008, Budapest, Hungary, March 29-April 6, 2008. Proceedings,
    volume 4963 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 337–340. Springer, 2008.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24.
 9. David Delahaye. A tactic language for the system Coq. In Michel Parigot and
    Andrei Voronkov, editors, Logic for Programming and Automated Reasoning, 7th
    International Conference, LPAR 2000, Reunion Island, France, November 11-12,
    2000, Proceedings, volume 1955 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 85–95.
    Springer, 2000. doi:10.1007/3-540-44404-1\_7.
10. James R. Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel Dominic Sleator, and Robert Endre Tarjan.
    Making data structures persistent. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 38(1):86–124, 1989.
    doi:10.1016/0022-0000(89)90034-2.
11. Thibault Gauthier, Cezary Kaliszyk, and Josef Urban. TacticToe: Learning to
    reason with HOL4 tactics. In Thomas Eiter and David Sands, editors, LPAR-21,
    21st International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence
    and Reasoning, Maun, Botswana, May 7-12, 2017, volume 46 of EPiC Series in
    Computing, pages 125–143. EasyChair, 2017. doi:10.29007/ntlb.
12. Thomas Gazagnaire, Fabrice Le Fessant, Yaron Minsky, Anil Madhavapeddy, and
    Frederic Tuong. Ocaml package manager. URL: https://opam.ocaml.org.
13. Georges Gonthier and Assia Mahboubi. An introduction to small scale reflection in
    Coq. J. Formalized Reasoning, 3(2):95–152, 2010. doi:10.6092/issn.1972-5787/
    1979.
14. Thomas Gransden, Neil Walkinshaw, and Rajeev Raman. SEPIA: search for
    proofs using inferred automata. In Amy P. Felty and Aart Middeldorp, edi-
    tors, Automated Deduction - CADE-25 - 25th International Conference on Au-
    tomated Deduction, Berlin, Germany, August 1-7, 2015, Proceedings, volume
    9195 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 246–255. Springer, 2015.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21401-6\_16.
15. Daniel Huang, Prafulla Dhariwal, Dawn Song, and Ilya Sutskever. GamePad: A
    learning environment for theorem proving. In 7th International Conference on
    Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
    OpenReview.net, 2019. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1xwKoR9Y7.
16. Jane Street. Dune: A composable build system for OCaml. URL: https://dune.
    build.
18                                L. Blaauwbroek et al.

17. Jan-Oliver Kaiser, Beta Ziliani, Robbert Krebbers, Yann Régis-Gianas, and Derek
    Dreyer. Mtac2: typed tactics for backward reasoning in Coq. Proc. ACM Program.
    Lang., 2(ICFP):78:1–78:31, 2018. doi:10.1145/3236773.
18. Cezary Kaliszyk and Josef Urban. Learning-assisted automated reasoning
    with Flyspeck. J. Autom. Reasoning, 53(2):173–213, 2014. doi:10.1007/
    s10817-014-9303-3.
19. Cezary Kaliszyk and Josef Urban. MizAR 40 for Mizar 40. J. Autom. Reasoning,
    55(3):245–256, 2015. doi:10.1007/s10817-015-9330-8.
20. Florent Kirchner and César A. Muñoz. The proof monad. J. Log. Algebraic Methods
    Program., 79(3-5):264–277, 2010. doi:10.1016/j.jlap.2010.03.002.
21. Ekaterina Komendantskaya, Jónathan Heras, and Gudmund Grov. Machine learning
    in Proof General: Interfacing interfaces. In Cezary Kaliszyk and Christoph Lüth,
    editors, Proceedings 10th International Workshop On User Interfaces for Theorem
    Provers, UITP 2012, Bremen, Germany, July 11th, 2012, volume 118 of EPTCS,
    pages 15–41, 2012. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.118.2.
22. Xavier Leroy. Formal verification of a realistic compiler. Commun. ACM, 52(7):107–
    115, 2009. doi:10.1145/1538788.1538814.
23. Gregory Malecha and Jesper Bengtson. Extensible and efficient automation
    through reflective tactics. In Peter Thiemann, editor, Programming Languages
    and Systems - 25th European Symposium on Programming, ESOP 2016, Held
    as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software,
    ETAPS 2016, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, April 2-8, 2016, Proceedings, vol-
    ume 9632 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 532–559. Springer, 2016.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-662-49498-1\_21.
24. Christine Paulin-Mohring. Inductive definitions in the system Coq - rules and
    properties. In Marc Bezem and Jan Friso Groote, editors, Typed Lambda Calculi and
    Applications, International Conference on Typed Lambda Calculi and Applications,
    TLCA ’93, Utrecht, The Netherlands, March 16-18, 1993, Proceedings, volume
    664 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 328–345. Springer, 1993. doi:
    10.1007/BFb0037116.
25. Pierre-Marie Pédrot. Ltac2: Tactical warfare. In CoqPL, 2019. URL: https:
    //popl19.sigplan.org/details/CoqPL-2019/8/Ltac2-Tactical-Warfare.
26. Alexandre Riazanov and Andrei Voronkov. Vampire. In Harald Ganzinger, editor,
    Automated Deduction - CADE-16, 16th International Conference on Automated
    Deduction, Trento, Italy, July 7-10, 1999, Proceedings, volume 1632 of Lecture Notes
    in Computer Science, pages 292–296. Springer, 1999. doi:10.1007/3-540-48660-7\
    _26.
27. Alex Sanchez-Stern, Yousef Alhessi, Lawrence K. Saul, and Sorin Lerner. Gener-
    ating correctness proofs with neural networks. In Koushik Sen and Mayur Naik,
    editors, Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine
    Learning and Programming Languages, MAPL@PLDI 2020, London, UK, June 15,
    2020, pages 1–10. ACM, 2020. doi:10.1145/3394450.3397466.
28. Stephan Schulz. System description: E 1.8. In Kenneth L. McMillan, Aart Middel-
    dorp, and Andrei Voronkov, editors, Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence,
    and Reasoning - 19th International Conference, LPAR-19, Stellenbosch, South
    Africa, December 14-19, 2013. Proceedings, volume 8312 of Lecture Notes in Com-
    puter Science, pages 735–743. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-45221-5\
    _49.
29. Konrad Slind and Michael Norrish. A brief overview of HOL4. In Otmane Aı̈t
    Mohamed, César A. Muñoz, and Sofiène Tahar, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher
                                            The Tactician (extended version)       19

    Order Logics, 21st International Conference, TPHOLs 2008, Montreal, Canada,
    August 18-21, 2008. Proceedings, volume 5170 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    pages 28–32. Springer, 2008. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-71067-7\_6.
30. The Coq Development Team. Coq package index. URL: https://coq.inria.fr/
    opam/www.
31. The Coq Development Team. The Coq proof assistant, version 8.11.0, Oct 2019.
    doi:10.5281/zenodo.3476303.
32. Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof
    assistants. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings
    of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June
    2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
    Research, pages 6984–6994. PMLR, 2019. URL: http://proceedings.mlr.press/
    v97/yang19a.html.
