                                              Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and
                                                     Automated Theorem Provers

                                                       Yicheng Qian1( ) , Joshua Clune2 , Clark Barrett1 ,
                                             CAV                      and Jeremy Avigad2                                     CAV
                                          Artifact                                                                           Artifact
                                         Evaluation               1
                                                                   Stanford University, Stanford, USA                       Evaluation

                                                                       pratherc@stanford.edu,
arXiv:2505.14929v2 [cs.LO] 24 May 2025




                                         Available           2
                                                               Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA                  Reusable




                                                 Abstract. Proof automation is crucial to large-scale formal mathemat-
                                                 ics and software/hardware verification projects in ITPs. Sophisticated
                                                 tools called hammers have been developed to provide general-purpose
                                                 proof automation in ITPs such as Coq and Isabelle, leveraging the power
                                                 of ATPs. An important component of a hammer is the translation algo-
                                                 rithm from the ITP’s logical system to the ATP’s logical system. In
                                                 this paper, we propose a novel translation algorithm for ITPs based on
                                                 dependent type theory. The algorithm is implemented in Lean 4 under
                                                 the name Lean-auto. When combined with ATPs, Lean-auto provides
                                                 general-purpose, ATP-based proof automation in Lean 4 for the first
                                                 time. Soundness of the main translation procedure is guaranteed, and
                                                 experimental results suggest that our algorithm is sufficiently complete
                                                 to automate the proof of many problems that arise in practical uses of
                                                 Lean 4. We also find that Lean-auto solves more problems than existing
                                                 tools on Lean 4’s math library Mathlib4.

                                                 Keywords: Proof Automation · Lean 4 · Dependent Type Theory


                                         1    Introduction

                                         Interactive Theorem Provers (ITPs) [16] are widely used in formal mathemat-
                                         ics and software/hardware verification. When using ITPs, straightforward but
                                         tedious proof tasks often arise during the proof development process. Due to
                                         the limited built-in automation in ITPs, discharging these proof tasks can re-
                                         quire significant manual effort. Hammers [6,13] are proof automation tools for
                                         ITPs which utilize Automated Theorem Provers (ATPs, including Satisfiability
                                         Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers). Hammers have proved useful because they can
                                         solve many proof tasks automatically [26].
                                             A hammer has three main components: premise selection, translation from
                                         ITP to ATP, and proof reconstruction from ATP to ITP. Premise selection col-
                                         lects the necessary premises (usually a list of theorems) needed to solve a proof
                                         task, translation exports the collected information from the ITP to the ATP,
                                         and proof reconstruction generates a proof in the ITP based on the output of
                                         the ATP. Our project Lean-auto primarily focuses on the translation from Lean
2      Y. Qian et al.

4 to ATPs. We note that Lean-auto does have a proof reconstruction procedure
which fully supports one of the three types of ATPs we use to evaluate Lean-
auto. For ATPs with proof reconstruction support, if the ATP successfully finds
a proof, Lean-auto will generate proof terms and check them using the Lean 4
kernel. For other ATPs, if the ATP successfully finds a proof, Lean-auto will
mark the problem as solved in Lean 4, but will generate a warning to indicate
that Lean-auto trusts the ATPs’ output. Ongoing projects are expected to im-
plement premise selection and more proof reconstruction support. See Sect. 8
for more discussion.
    The discrepancies between logical systems of ATPs and ITPs pose significant
challenges to translation procedures between them. Several popular ITPs are
based on highly expressive logical systems. For example, Isabelle [35] is based
on polymorphic higher-order logic, while Coq [4] and Lean 4 [24]3 are based
on an even more expressive logical system called dependent type theory (also
known as λC in the lambda cube) [3,11].4 Moreover, features such as typeclasses
[14], universe polymorphism [31], and inductive types [12] are commonly used
as extensions to the base logical system to enhance usability of the ITPs. On
the other hand, ATPs are usually based on less expressive logical systems such
as first-order logic (FOL) [2,20,23,30] and (in recent years) higher-order logic
(HOL) [5,33,34]. An overview of the various logical systems relevant to our work
is given in Sect. 2.2.
    There are two existing approaches for translation from more expressive log-
ical systems to less expressive ones: encoding-based translation and monomor-
phization. Encoding-based translation is used in CoqHammer [13] to translate
Coq into untyped FOL. Monomorphization is used to eliminate polymorphism
in Isabelle Sledgehammer [6,7,26]. Our small-scale experiment5 on Mathlib4 sug-
gests that encoding-based translation tends to produce much larger outputs
than monomorphization, which could negatively affect the performance of ATPs.
Therefore, we use monomorphization in Lean-auto. An overview of these two
translation methods and related discussions are given in Sect. 3.
    Since ATPs have started supporting HOL in recent years [5,33,34], Lean-auto
translates Lean 4 to HOL. The overall translation has two stages: preprocess-
ing and monomorphization. Monomorphization itself has three stages: quantifier
instantiation, λ∗→ abstraction, and universe lifting. Roughly speaking, prepro-
cessing translates Lean 4 into dependent type theory,6 and monomorphization
translates dependent type theory into HOL. The monomorphization procedure
of Lean-auto is inspired by Isabelle Sledgehammer. However, since dependent
type theory is considerably different from Isabelle’s HOL, the monomorphiza-
tion procedure is thoroughly redesigned, and presented in a different way in our

3
  Agda [8] is also dependently typed, but is based on Martin-Löf type theory.
4
  Or calculus of inductive constructions (CIC), depending on whether inductive types
  are considered as an extension.
5
  See Appendix I.
6
  As mentioned before, Lean 4 is different from dependent type theory because it
  includes various additional language features.
  Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers            3

paper. Challanges related to dependent type theory and Lean 4 are discussed in
Sect. 4.3.
                                                 In our paper, we work backwards
                                            in Lean-auto’s translation workflow.
                 Lean 4                     We start from λ∗→ abstraction (Sect.
                                            5), then quantifier instantiation (Sect.
                                            6), and end with preprocessing (Sect.
             Preprocessing
                                            7). This is because it is easier to be-
               (Sect. 7)
                                            gin with the simpler logical system
                     λC                     and progressively take into account
                                            more features of the highly expressive
        Quantifier instantiation            Lean 4 language. We leave universe
               (Sect. 6)                    lifting to Appendix E since it is rel-
                     QMono λC               atively straightforward compared to
                                            the other steps.
            λ∗→ abstraction
               (Sect. 5)

                     HOL∗
            Universe lifting                1.1   Related Work
            (Appendix E)

                  HOL                        Hammers are not restricted to ITPs
                                             with expressive logical systems. Sev-
Fig. 1. Translation workflow of Lean-auto. eral ITPs based on FOL or HOL also
                                             have their hammers, for example, the
                                             hammer of Mizar [19], the hammer of
                                             MetaMath [9], and HOL(y)Hammer
                                             [18]. Apart from hammers, there are
                                             various other ITP proof automation
                                             tools. For example, Coq and Lean
                                             both come with a tactics language,
                                             and built-in tactics provide users with
                                             low-level proof automation, such as
Coq’s apply, rewrite, and destruct tactics [4], and Lean’s apply, rw, and
cases tactics [1]. Domain-specific automation tools are also common, such as
the intuitionistic propositional logic solver tauto of Coq, congruence closure al-
gorithm congruence of Coq, and integer linear arithmetic solver omega of Lean 4,
all implemented as tactics. Lightweight proof search procedures in ITPs include
Coq’s auto and Lean 4’s Aesop [21]. There are also lightweight ATPs imple-
mented in ITPs, such as Isabelle’s Metis [17] and blast_tac [25], HOL Light’s
Meson [15], and Lean 4’s Duper [10]. Finally, machine learning algorithms have
also been used to automate proof in ITPs, for example, MagnusHammer [22] of
Isabelle, LeanDojo [37] of Lean, GPT-f [27] of Metamath, and ASTactic [36] of
Coq.
4       Y. Qian et al.

2     Preliminaries

2.1   Dependent Type Theory

Dependent type theory, or λC in the λ-cube, or the calculus of constructions
(CoC) [3], is a highly expressive type system and logical system. It is the logical
foundation of Coq, Lean 4, and Agda. To align with Lean 4, we use the variant
of λC which contains a countable number of non-cumulative universe levels. The
syntax of λC terms is defined inductively as follows:

              TC ::= V | Uℓ | TC TC | λ(V : TC ).TC | ∀(V : TC ).TC ,

where V is the set of variables, Uℓ (ℓ ∈ N) are the sorts (i.e., the types of types),
TC TC is function application, λ(V : TC ).TC is λ abstraction, and ∀(V : TC ).TC
is the product type. ℓ is called the universe level of Uℓ . We use ∀ instead of Π
to align with the syntax of Lean, Coq, and Agda. Syntactical equality of terms
will be denoted as =, and βη-equivalence of terms will be denoted as ∼     =.
    We adopt the following commonly-used notational conventions: function ap-
plication binds stronger than λ and ∀, and is left-associative; consecutive λs and
∀s can be merged, and λs and ∀s with the same binder type can be further merged
into the same parenthesis; when the product type is non-dependent, → can be
used instead of ∀. Importantly, → binds stronger than ∀, i.e., ∀(x : α).β → γ is
interpreted as ∀(x : α).(β → γ) instead of (∀(x : α).β) → γ, the latter being the
convention in FOL and HOL. The abbreviations ⊥, ¬, ∧, ∨, ↔, =ℓ , and ∃ℓ are
defined in the usual way.7
    A context Γ is a list of variable declarations x1 : α1 , . . . , xn : αn . Type
judgements will be written as Γ ⊢ t : α, which stands for “λC term t has type
α under context Γ .” 8 If Γ ⊢ t : α, then t is called a well-formed term, and α
is called a (well-formed) type.9 Under context Γ , a type α is called inhabited iff
there exists t such that Γ ⊢ t : α, in which case t is called an inhabitant of α.
Propositions are types of type U0 . A proof of a proposition p : U0 is an inhabitant
of p. A proposition p : U0 is provable iff it is inhabited. Given a context Γ and
a proposition p, we use Γ ⊢?p to represent the problem of finding a proof of p
under context Γ .
    For a function f : ∀(x1 : α1 ) . . . (xn : αn ).β (here β may begin with ∀), the
nth argument of f is called a static dependent argument iff xn occurs in β. In
many cases, static dependent arguments are also type arguments; for example,
the first and second arguments of List.map : ∀(α β : U1 ).(α → β) → List α →
List β are both static dependent arguments. Another important concept is de-
pendent argument.10 In practical scenarios, “dependent argument” and “static
dependent argument” usually have the same meaning. Their intricate difference
is explained in Sect. 4.3.
7
   See Appendix A.
8
   Derivation rules for type judgements of λC are given in Appendix B.
 9
   In λC, all well-formed types are also well-formed terms.
10
   See Appendix G for its formal definition.
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers       5

   We use λC notation for all logical systems that can be embedded in λC. When
presenting Lean 4 examples, we use additional Lean 4 notational conventions.
These are explained in Sect. 2.4.

2.2     Logical Systems of ITPs and ATPs
In this section, we give an overview of the various logical systems that are rel-
evant to our work. In the following list, the logical systems are ordered from
the least expressive to the most expressive. Note that, except for λC and more
expressive systems, all other logical systems have two components: term calculus
(which specifies the construction and computation rules of terms), and logical
axioms/rules.
 1. Untyped FOL, or predicate logic.
 2. Many-sorted FOL.
 3. Many-sorted HOL (monomorphic HOL, or just HOL), where functions are
    allowed to take functions as arguments, and quantifiers can quantify over
    functions. Its term calculus is simply typed lambda calculus λ→ [3].
 4. Many-sorted HOL with a countable number of universe levels, denoted as
    HOL∗ , which is discussed in Sect 2.3. This is an intermediate logical system
    used in Lean-auto’s monomorphization. It is essentially equivalent to HOL11 .
 5. HOL with rank-1 polymorphism, or polymorphic HOL. Its term calculus is
    λ2 in the λ-cube [3]. In polymorphic HOL, functions are allowed to take type
    arguments, and quantifiers can quantify over types. However, type construc-
    tors, or types dependent on types, are not allowed.
 6. Isabelle’s logical system. Based on polymorphic HOL. Supports (co)inductive
    datatypes and recursive functions.
 7. Dependent type theory, or λC. Compared to polymorphic HOL, types can
    depend on terms and types in λC.
 8. Coq, Lean 4, and Agda’s logical systems. Based on λC. Extensions to λC
    that are present in (at least one of) these ITPs include (co)inductive types,
    universe levels, universe polymorphism, typeclasses, and many others.
All previously mentioned hammers translate between these logical systems. Is-
abelle Sledgehammer translates between Isabelle and HOL/FOL.12 CoqHam-
mer translates between Coq and untyped FOL. Lean-auto translates between
Lean 4 and monomorphic HOL. As mentioned before, Lean-auto’s preprocess-
ing translates Lean 4 into λC, and monomorphization translates λC into HOL.
More specifically, quantifier instantiation and λ∗→ abstraction translates λC into
HOL∗ , and universe lifting translates HOL∗ into HOL.

2.3     Pure Type Systems λC, λ→ , λ∗→ and Related Logical Systems
The Pure Type System (PTS) [3] formalism enables concise specification of a
class of type systems. We use PTS to formally specify the underlying type sys-
tems of the logical systems used in Lean-auto’s translation.
11
     In Appendix E, we show that HOL∗ is essentially equivalent to HOL.
12
     The exact logical system depends on the mode being used.
6       Y. Qian et al.

    The specification of a PTS consists of a triple (S, A, R), where S is the set of
sorts, A ⊆ S × S is the set of axioms, and R ⊆ S × S × S is the set of rules. An
axiom (s1 , s2 ) ∈ A is intended to represent the typing axiom s1 : s2 . The syntax
of PTS terms is given by

                   T ::= V | S | T T | λ(V : T ).T | ∀(V : T ).T

    Three type systems, λC, λ→ , and λ∗→ , will be formulated using PTS.13 As
mentioned above, λ→ is the term calculus of HOL, and λ∗→ is the term calculus
of HOL∗ . Note that U0 is not present in λ→ and λ∗→ because it is a special
sort for propositions in λC. The type of propositions in HOL and HOL∗ will be
represented by a special symbol Bool : U1 .
    λ∗→ and λ→ are similar, except that λ∗→ allows a countable number of universe
levels ℓ ∈ N∗ , where N∗ is the set of positive integers. For example, in the type
(α → β) → γ, the subterms α, β, and γ must be of type U1 in the system λ→ ;
however, in λ∗→ , it is possible that α : Uℓ1 , β : Uℓ2 , γ : Uℓ3 where ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓ3 may
be different. A technicality related to PTS requires the presence of the sorts U′ℓ
in λ∗→ , with axioms Uℓ : U′ℓ .
    The logical systems HOL and HOL∗ are λ→ and λ∗→ augmented with the
symbols Bool, ⊥′ , →′ , ∀′s (for each type s), their corresponding typing rules, and
logical rules. The abbreviations ∧′ , ∨′ , ¬′ , ↔, =′s , ∃′s are defined in a way consis-
tent with their λC counterparts. The set of HOL and HOL∗ terms are denoted
               ∗
as T→ and T→     , respectively.14

2.4   Lean and Mathlib
Lean is an ITP based on dependent type theory. Lean-auto is implemented in
Lean 4, the latest version of Lean. At present, the most prominent project in
Lean is Mathlib [32], which was renamed to Mathlib415 when it was moved to
Lean 4. Notably, Mathlib is the foundation of the Liquid Tensor Experiment
[29], which successfully formalizes cutting-edge results in mathematics.
    We will follow Lean 4 conventions when presenting Lean 4 examples. Sort
ℓ represents Uℓ , and Type ℓ represents Uℓ+1 . Sort 1 (or Type 0) can be ab-
breviated as Type, and Sort 0 can be abbreviated as Prop. All user-declared
symbols, including functions, are called constants in Lean 4. Constants can have
universe level parameters, but for simplicity, they are not shown in many of our
Lean 4 examples. Functions are allowed to have implicit arguments, which are
represented by {x : α} instead of (x : α) in the type of the function. Prepend-
ing @ to the name of a function causes implicit arguments to become explicit.
For example, given the polymorphic list map function with the first and second
argument being implicit:
        List.map : ∀ {α β : Type}, (α → β) → List α → List β,
13
   The derivation rules of PTS are given in Appendix B.
14
   The specifications of λC, λ→ , and λ∗→ using PTS are given in Appendix C. The
   formal definitions of HOL and HOL∗ are given in Appendix D.
15
   GitHub link: https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers            7

the expression @List.map α β f is the same as List.map f, where f : α →
β.
    Typeclasses are extensively used by Lean 4’s built-in library and Mathlib4 to
overload arithmetic operators and represent mathematical structures. For exam-
ple, consider the HAdd typeclass and the HAdd.hAdd function used to represent
the addition operator in Lean 4.
                       HAdd : ∀ (α β γ : Type), Type
    HAdd.hAdd : ∀ {α β γ : Type} [self : HAdd α β γ], α → β → γ
An inhabitant of HAdd α β γ, called a typeclass instance, is a wrapper of a
“heterogeneous” addition operator, with α and β as its input types and γ as
its output type. The square bracket in the type of HAdd.hAdd indicates that
the enclosed argument is an instance argument, which is a special type of im-
plicit argument intended to be filled by Lean 4’s typeclass inference algorithm.
Given the syntax x + y where x : α and y : β, the typeclass inference algo-
rithm will attempt to find a type γ and an instance inst : HAdd α β γ, and
elaborate the syntax x + y into the expression @HAdd.hAdd α β γ inst x y.
In @HAdd.hAdd α β γ inst, the HAdd.hAdd function unwraps inst and returns
the addition operator. This provides a mechanism for overloading operators. The
same mechanism is used to represent mathematical structures in Mathlib4.
    Lean 4 supports definitional equality. Two terms are definitionally equal iff
they can be converted to each other via Lean 4’s built-in conversion rules. To
test definitional equality of two terms s and t, we can either reduce s and t to
their normal forms and check syntactical equality, or use the optimized built-in
function isDefEq16 which checks definitional equality of a pair of terms.
    Inductive type is another important Lean 4 feature relevant to Lean-auto. It
is handled by Lean-auto’s preprocessing stage and is discussed in Sect. 7.
    Lean 4 supports classical axioms such as function extensionality, excluded
middle, and axiom of choice. Plain CoC does not include classical axioms. In
contrast, classical axioms are built-in17 in Lean 4. Lean-auto uses them during
proof reconstruction.


3      Encoding-based Translation and Monomorphization
Encoding-based translation and monomorphization are two approaches to trans-
lating from more expressive logical systems to less expressive logical systems.
    The idea behind encoding-based translations is to encode constructions in
the more expressive system using function symbols in the less expressive system
and to define the translation as a recursive function on the terms and formulas
of the more expressive system. For example, in the dependent type theory of
Coq, we have the type judgement relation Γ ⊢ x : w, which means “x is of
type w under context Γ .” There is no direct equivalent of this typing relation in
untyped FOL. To express Coq type judgements in untyped FOL, CoqHammer
16
     Its full Lean 4 name is Lean.Meta.isDefEq.
17
     They are either declared as axioms or derived from previously declared axioms, and
     they are imported during initialization.
8       Y. Qian et al.

first introduces the uninterpreted FOL predicate T (u∗ , a∗ ), where u∗ and a∗ are
FOL terms translated from Coq term u and atomic Coq type a (here atomic
roughly means that a cannot be further decomposed by the translation procedure
of CoqHammer). Then, a recursive function GΓ (u, w) is defined on the Coq
context Γ and the Coq terms u, w. The function GΓ (u, w) translates the typing
relation Γ ⊢ u : w into an untyped FOL formula, in which the T predicate is
used to express type judgements involving atomic types.
    Encoding-based translation has the advantage of being (almost) complete
and straightforward to compute. However, certain features of the more expressive
logical system must be omitted to produce translation results of reasonable size,
which sacrifices soundness [13]. Moreover, even with this tradeoff, the translated
expression is usually much larger than the original expression.
    The idea behind monomorphization is the fact that the proof of many propo-
sitions in the more expressive system can essentially be conducted in the less
expressive system. For example, in polymorphic HOL, given
 1. the list map function List.map : ∀(α β : U1 ).(α → β) → List α → List β
 2. two lists of natural numbers xs ys : List N and two functions f g : N → N
 3. the premise xs = ys ∧ f = g
The equality
                     List.map N N f xs = List.map N N g ys                       (1)
is provable using two rewrites xs ⇒ ys, f ⇒ g. The crucial observation is that,
although List.map is polymorphic, the term List.map N N as a whole behaves
just like a monomorphic function, and therefore the rewrites can essentially be
performed in monomorphic HOL. More formally, the formula (1) is the image
of the monomorphic HOL formula h f ∗ xs∗ = h g ∗ ys∗ under the inter-logical-
system “substitution”
        σ := {h 7→ List.map N N, f ∗ 7→ f, g ∗ 7→ g, xs∗ 7→ xs, ys∗ 7→ ys},
and the rewrites xs ⇒ ys, f ⇒ g in polymorphic HOL are just manifestations of
the rewrites xs∗ ⇒ ys∗ , f ∗ ⇒ g ∗ in monomorphic HOL.
    Monomorphization is sound, produces small translation results, and preserves
term structures during translation. However, monomorphization is incomplete,
since it is not always possible to find an appropriate formula in the less expressive
logical system that reflects the original formula in the more expressive logical
system.
    The difference in output size between encoding-based translation and mono-
morphization is particularly pronounced in Lean 4 (see Appendix I for experi-
mental results). As mentioned in Sect. 2.4, a user-facing Lean 4 syntax as simple
as x + y corresponds to the complicated expression HAdd.hAdd α β γ inst x
y, where inst itself is a potentially large expression synthesized by typeclass
inference. The result of encoding-based translation on the above expression is
larger than the expression itself. On the other hand, our monomorphization pro-
cedure will translate the above expression into a much smaller one: h x∗ y ∗ ,
where HAdd.hAdd α β γ inst is “absorbed” into h via the inter-logical-system
“substitution.”
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers         9

4      An Overview of Lean-auto

As mentioned before, the translation workflow of Lean-auto consists of four
stages: preprocessing, and the three stages of monomorphization: quantifier in-
stantiation, λ∗→ abstraction, and universe lifting.
    Roughly speaking, the preprocessing stage translates Lean 4 into dependent
type theory (λC), which involves handling definitional equality and inductive
types. It also performs minimal transformation on the translated λC problem.
This includes introducing all leading ∀ quantifiers into the context and applying
proof by contradiction.18 Then, everything in the context with type Prop is
collected by Lean-auto and added to the list of premises. Sect. 7 contains a more
detailed discussion of preprocessing.
    Universe lifting translates HOL∗ into HOL. Conceptually, it erases all the
universe level information in the input expression. However, implementing it
as a sound translation procedure in Lean 4 requires a decent amount of work.
Details about universe lifting are given in Appendix E.
    In Sect. 4.1 and 4.2, we provide intuition for the λ→ abstraction and quantifier
instantiation stages by giving a simplified explanation of their execution on an
example. Sect. 4.3 gives a high-level discussion of some of the challenges posed
by dependent type theory and Lean 4.


4.1     λ∗→ Abstraction



            map : ∀ {α β : Type}, (α → β) → List α → List β
            reverse : ∀ {α : Type}, List α → List α
            map_reverse : ∀ {α β : Type} (f : α → β) (l : List α),
              map f (reverse l) = reverse (map f l)
            reverse_reverse : ∀ {α : Type} (as : List α),
              reverse (reverse as) = as
            ⊢ ∀ (A B : Type) (f : A → B) (xs : List A),
                reverse (map f (reverse xs)) = map f xs

                 Fig. 2. Lean 4 proof state of a problem involving List.


    The Lean 4 proof state of the problem we will consider is shown in Figure 2.
The hypotheses (premises) and variable declarations are displayed before ⊢, while
the goal comes after ⊢. map_reverse states that map commutes with reverse,
and reverse_reverse states that reverse is the inverse function of itself.
    Since the problem is already in the λC fragment of Lean, the only prepro-
cessing step required is to introduce the universal quantifiers appearing in the
goal into the context and then apply proof by contradiction. The resulting proof
18
     Proof by contradiction introduces the negation of the goal into the context and
     replaces the goal with ⊥.
10      Y. Qian et al.


 map : ∀ {α β : Type}, (α → β) → List α → List β
 reverse : ∀ {α : Type}, List α → List α
 map_reverse : ∀ {α β : Type} (f : α → β) (l : List α),
   @Eq (List β) (@map α β f (@reverse α l)) (@reverse β (@map α β f l))
 reverse_reverse : ∀ {α : Type} (as : List α),
   @Eq (List α) (@reverse α (@reverse α as)) as
 A B : Type
 f : A → B
 xs : List A
 neg_goal : Not (@Eq (List B)
   (@reverse B (@map A B f (@reverse A xs))) (@map A B f xs))
 ⊢ False

Fig. 3. Lean 4 proof state after variable introduction and application of proof by con-
tradiction, with implicit arguments displayed. Note that the equality sign in Figure 2
is syntactic sugar for the polymorphic function Eq shown here.



state is shown in Figure 3. For clarity, we have displayed the implicit arguments
of all the functions.
    First, we focus on translating neg_goal into HOL∗ . Following the discussion
in Sect. 3, we would like to find a HOL∗ formula φ and a “substitution” σ
such that the image of φ under σ is neg_goal. We also want the problem to
be provable after the translation, so φ should preserve as much information in
neg_goal as possible.
    Three polymorphic functions: Eq, map and reverse, occur in neg_goal. Al-
though these functions are polymorphic, instances of these functions with their
dependent arguments instantiated behave like HOL∗ variables (we will refer to
such instances as HOL∗ instances). The type constructor List is also not al-
lowed in HOL∗ , but List A and List B behave just like HOL∗ type variables
(we will refer to expressions such as List A and List B as HOL∗ type instances).
Therefore, we can choose

       φ := ¬(EqLB (rB (mAB f ∗ (rA xs ∗ ))) (mAB f ∗ xs ∗ ))
       σ := {EqLB 7→ @Eq (List B), mAB 7→ @map A B,
              rA 7→ @reverse A, rB 7→ @reverse B, f ∗ 7→ f, xs ∗ 7→ xs
              LA → List A, LB → List B, A → A, B → B},

where EqLB : LB → LB → Bool, rA : LA → LA, rB : LB → LB, mAB : (A →
B) → LA → LB, f ∗ : A → B, xs ∗ : LA.
   In a sense, the HOL∗ (type) instances are “abstracted” to HOL∗ (type) vari-
ables. Note that the logical rules of HOL∗ are not relevant to this abstraction
procedure—only the term calculus λ∗→ is involved. Therefore, we name this pro-
cedure λ∗→ abstraction.
   However, λ∗→ abstraction is not directly applicable to map_reverse and
reverse_reverse, because dependent arguments of polymorphic functions oc-
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers          11

curring in them contain universally quantified variables. Naturally, we would like
to instantiate the quantifiers to make λ∗→ abstraction applicable.

4.2     Quantifier Instantiation
To understand how quantifiers should be instantiated, we investigate how they
would be instantiated if we were to prove the goal manually. There are at least
two ways we can proceed. We can either first use @map_reverse A B to swap the
outer reverse with map, then use @reverse_reverse A to eliminate reverse;
or, first use @map_reverse A B to swap the inner reverse with map, then use
@reverse_reverse B to eliminate reverse. Notice how the dependent argu-
ments of a function f 19 in the instantiated hypotheses match the dependent
arguments of f in the HOL∗ instances of f in the goal.
    Quantifier instantiation in Lean-auto’s monomorphization procedure is based
on a matching procedure that reflects the above observation. Given a set of for-
mulas S, the matching procedure first computes the set M of HOL∗ instances
occurring in S and then matches expressions in S with elements of M . For exam-
ple, given S = {@map_reverse, @reverse_reverse, neg_goal}, the set M is
{@reverse A, @reverse B, @map A B, @Eq (List B)}, all of whose elements
are collected from neg_goal. The matching procedure will preform the following
matchings:
 1. @Eq (List β) in map_reverse with @Eq (List B), which produces fun α
    => @map_reverse α B
 2. @map α β in map_reverse with @map A B, which produces @map_reverse
    A B
 3. @reverse α in map_reverse with @reverse A and @reverse B, which pro-
    duces @map_reverse A and @map_reverse B
 4. @reverse β in map_reverse with @reverse A and @reverse B, which pro-
    duces fun α => @map_reverse α A and fun α => @map_reverse α B
 5. @Eq (List α) in reverse_reverse with @Eq (List B), which produces
    @reverse_reverse B
 6. @reverse α in reverse_reverse with @reverse A and @reverse B, which
    produces @reverse_reverse A and @reverse_reverse B
   Since @reverse_reverse A, @reverse_reverse B and @map_reverse A B
are present, the instances produced are already sufficient for proving the goal.
But generally speaking, newly generated hypothesis instances and HOL∗ in-
stances20 can still be matched with each other (and existing ones) to produce
new useful results. Hence, Lean-auto’s monomorphization uses a saturation loop
which repeats the matching procedure until either no new instances can be pro-
duced or a prescribed threshold is reached.

4.3     Challenges Related to Dependent Type Theory and Lean 4
19
     In the context of this problem, f could be reverse or map.
20
     New HOL∗ instances are collected from newly generated hypothesis instances.
12        Y. Qian et al.


 @DFunLike.coe : {F : Type (max u_1 u_5)}
   → {α : outParam (Type u_1)} → {β : outParam (α → Type u_5)}
   → [self : DFunLike F α β] → F → (a : α) → β a

 @DFunLike.coe (A0 →+ B0 ) A0 (fun x => B0 ) AddMonoidHom.instFunLike f0 a


 Fig. 4. The function DFunLike.coe from MathLib4 and an expression containing it.


Dependent Arguments are Dynamic: In λC, whether an argument is de-
pendent depends on how previous arguments are instantiated. Consider the
example shown in Figure 4. Here DFunLike.coe is a low-level utility which
turns a function-like object into its corresponding function. In the signature
of DFunLike.coe, the return type β a depends on the last argument a : α.
However, when β is instantiated with fun x => B0 , as in the expression at the
bottom of Figure 4, the return type β a reduces to B0 , which no longer depends
on the last argument. Our monomorphization procedure takes preceding argu-
ments into consideration when determining whether an argument is dependent.


HOL∗ Instances are Dynamic: In λC, whether an expression is a HOL∗
instance is also context-dependent. Consider the simple expression @reverse =
@reverse, where reverse is the same as in Figure 3. Although @reverse is
polymorphic, it behaves like a HOL∗ variable in @reverse = @reverse. More
formally, let

        φ := (f = f )
         σ := {f 7→ @reverse, γ 7→ (∀ {α β : Type}, List α → List β)}

where f : γ. Then, @reverse = @reverse is the image of the HOL∗ formula
φ under σ. Intuitively, the dependent arguments in the type of reverse can
be “absorbed” into the HOL∗ type variable γ because neither of the dependent
arguments of reverse are present. Our monomorphization procedure is able to
detect such context-dependent HOL∗ instances.


Definitional Equality: As mentioned before, two syntactically different ex-
pressions can be definitionally equal in Lean 4. Somehow, we need to account
for this in Lean-auto’s translation. Theoretically speaking, reducing all expres-
sions to normal forms would solve the problem to a large extent. However, full
reduction is prohibitively expensive on complex expressions in real-life Lean 4
projects, and the reduced expressions could be much larger than the original
expressions.21 Moreover, the reduced expressions might contain complex depen-
dent types that Lean-auto cannot handle. Therefore, we devise several other
methods to address definitional equality.
21
     Appendix J presents a set of experiments that demonstrate these issues.
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers                  13

     In Lean-auto, there are three separate occasions where definitional equality
has to be addressed.
     First, when a symbol is defined in Lean 4, (potentially multiple) equational
theorems that reflect the definitional equalities related to the symbol are au-
tomatically generated. Lean-auto can be configured to collect these equational
theorems and to use them to perform reduction and unfold constants (see Sect.
7).
     Second, during λ∗→ abstraction, we would like HOL∗ instances that are syn-
tactically different but definitionally equal to be abstracted to the same HOL∗
variable. Our λ∗→ abstraction algorithm keeps a set H of mutually definitionally
unequal HOL∗ instances. Whenever a new HOL∗ instance t is found, we test
definitional equality of t with elements of H using isDefEq. Since isDefEq is
expensive, a fingerprint 22 is computed for each HOL∗ instance, and fingerprint
equality is tested before calling isDefEq.
     Finally, even if two HOL∗ instances are definitionally unequal, there could
still be nontrivial relations between them. For example, if f : N → N is de-
fined as f := λ(x : N).g x x, the equation ∀(x : N).f x = g x x would be
a nontrivial relationship between f and g. Lean-auto will attempt to gener-
ate such equational theorems during quantifier instantiation. For each pair of
HOL∗ instances c1 , c2 , Lean-auto attempts to find terms t1 , . . . , tn such that
λx1 . . . xm . c1 y1 . . . yl = c2 t1 . . . tn , where x1 , . . . , xm are variables occurring
in t1 , . . . , tn , and {y1 , . . . , yl } is a subset of {x1 , . . . , xm }.


Absorbing Typeclass Instance Arguments: In Lean 4, many functions have
instance arguments that are not dependent arguments. An example is the fourth
argument of HAdd.hAdd mentioned in Sect. 2.4. Since instance arguments are
usually large expressions synthesized by Lean 4’s typeclass inference algorithm,
translating them can result in large HOL∗ terms. Lean-auto’s implementation
attempts to absorb typeclass arguments into HOL∗ variables by instantiating
typeclass instance quantifiers and requiring HOL∗ instances to take typeclass
arguments with them.23


5     λ∗→ Abstraction

In this section, we discuss the λ∗→ abstraction procedure, the second step of Lean-
auto’s monomorphization. Note that universe lifting, the first step, is presented
in Appendix E. As mentioned before, we use Γ ⊢?p to represent the problem of
finding a proof of p under context Γ .
    The goal of λ∗→ abstraction is to translate essentially higher-order problems
(EHOPs) into HOL∗ . Intuitively, a λC problem Γ ⊢?p is EHOP iff there exists
a provable HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′ and a “substitution” σ such that Γ ⊢?p is
22
   Roughly speaking, a fingerprint of an expression is a summary of the expression’s
   syntax.
23
   For simplicity, this detail is not discussed in Appendix G and H.
14      Y. Qian et al.

the image of Γ ′ ⊢?p′ under σ. Given Γ ⊢?p, λ∗→ abstraction attempts to find
such a triple (Γ ′ , p′ , σ). The formal definition of EHOP relies on the concept of
HOL∗ -to-λC substitution and canonical embedding (see Appendix F).
Definition 1. A λC problem Γ ⊢?p is essentially higher-order provable (EHOP)
iff there exists a provable HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′ and a substitution (π ∗ (Γ ′ ), Γ, σ)
such that p ∼ = σ(π ∗ (p′ )).
   As a practical algorithm, Lean-auto’s λ∗→ abstraction only works on input
problems Γ ⊢?p where p is a λC term structurally similar to HOL∗ terms.
We call such λC terms quasi-monomorphic terms. They serve as the interme-
diate representation between quantifier instantiation and λ∗→ abstraction. We
use QMono(Γ ; B, t) to represent “t is quasi-monomorphic under context Γ , with
variables in B being bound variables.” 24 QMono has the following properties:
 1. Canonically embedded HOL∗ terms are QMono.
 2. In QMono terms, proofs cannot be bound by λ or dependent ∀ binders.
 3. A dependently typed free variable does not break the QMono property iff its
    dependent arguments do not contain bound variables.
 4. A dependently typed bound variable does not break the QMono property iff
    its dependent arguments are not instantiated.
 5. Except for within type declarations of bound variables, bodies of ∀ abstrac-
    tions must be propositions.
   The λ∗→ abstraction algorithm itself is conceptually simple, but it involves
many technical details because it must handle all possible features of QMono
terms.25 Given a λC problem Γ ⊢?p, the λ∗→ abstraction algorithm traverses
p and turns HOL∗ instances it finds into HOL∗ variables. The “substitution” it
returns is the map from HOL∗ variables to their corresponding HOL∗ instances.


6    Quantifier Instantiation
In this section, we discuss the first step of Lean-auto’s monomorphization : quan-
tifier instantiation. Given a context Γ and a list of hypotheses h1 : t1 , . . . , hn : tn ,
the quantifier instantiation procedure of Lean-auto attempts to instantiate quan-
tifiers in t1 , . . . , tn to obtain terms suitable for λ∗→ abstraction (i.e., to obtain
terms that satisfy the QMono predicate).
     As mentioned in Sect. 4.2, quantifier instantiation is based on a saturation
loop which matches HOL∗ instances of functions with subterms of hypothesis in-
stances. There are two main algorithms in quantifier instantiation: matchInst and
saturate. The matchInst algorithm is responsible for matching HOL∗ instances
with subterms of hypothesis instances to generate new hypothesis instances,
and the saturate algorithm is the main saturation loop. The saturate algorithm
is given in Algorithm 1.26
24
   See Appendix G for the formal definition of QMono.
25
   See Appendix G for details of the algorithm.
26
   See Appendix H for the matchInst algorithm and details of the saturate algorithm.
Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers   15




Function saturate(Γ ; H, maxInsts)
   In : λC context Γ , list of λC terms H, and threshold maxInsts
   Out : A list of λC terms
   hi := H /* A list of hypothesis instances */
   ci := List.empty() /* A list of constant instances */
   /* A queue of active constant and hypothesis instances */
   active := Queue.empty()
   for h : H do
       hi.push((0, h))
       for c : holInsts(Γ ; ∅, h) do
           ci.push(c); active.push((1, c))
   while ! active.empty() do
       if hi.size() + ci.size() > maxInsts then break
       (type, front) := active.front()
       active.popFront()
       if type = 0 then
           prevci := ci.copy()
           for c : prevci do
                matchOnePair(c, front, ci, hi, active)
       else
           prevhi := hi.copy()
           for h : prevhi do
                matchOnePair(front, h, ci, hi, active)
       end
   end
   monohi := List.empty()
   for h : hi do
       if QMono(Γ ; ∅, h) then monohi.push(h)
   return monohi
end

Function matchOnePair(c, h, ci, hi, active)
   newhi := matchInst(Γ ; c, h)
   for nh : newhi do
       if nh ∈ hi then continue
       hi.push(nh); active.push((0, nh))
       newci := holInsts(Γ ; ∅, nh)
       for nc : newci do
           if nc ∈ ci then continue
           ci.push(nc); active.push((1, nc))
end
   Algorithm 1: Main saturation loop of quantifier instantiation
16        Y. Qian et al.

    The saturate algorithm maintains a queue of active HOL∗ instances and hy-
pothesis instances, denoted as active. In each loop, an element is popped from
active. If it is a HOL∗ instance, it is matched with all existing hypothesis in-
stances; if it is a hypothesis instance, it is matched with all existing HOL∗
instances. For each newly generated hypothesis instance h, both h and all the
HOL∗ instances occurring in h are added to active.
    The saturate algorithm also handles equational theorem generation of HOL∗
instances.27 For each new HOL∗ instance c, we generate equational theorems be-
tween c and existing HOL∗ instances. The newly generated equational theorems
are added to the set of existing hypothesis instances so that they can participate
in later matchings.


7      Preprocessing

Preprocessing translates Lean 4 into dependent type theory, with the exception
that part of definitional equality handling happens during monomorphization.
In this section, we list the major steps of Lean-auto’s preprocessing.


Definitional Equality: To handle definitional equality in Lean 4, Lean-auto
partially reduces the input expressions, using Lean 4’s built-in Meta.transform
and Meta.whnf. This includes βζηι reduction and part of δ reduction. In Lean
4, δ reduction is controlled by a reducibility setting, and Lean-auto allows users
to specify the reducibility setting used by the preprocessor. For finer-grained
control over which constants should be unfolded, Lean-auto allows users to sup-
ply a definitional equality instruction d[g1 , . . . , gn ] and an unfolding instruction
u[f1 , . . . , fn ], where fi , gi are constants.
    For the definitional equality instruction, Lean-auto automatically collects all
the definitional equalities associated with g1 , . . . , gn and combines them with the
premises supplied by the user. For the unfolding instruction, Lean-auto recur-
sively unfolds f1 , . . . , fn . To ensure termination, Lean-auto performs a topolog-
ical sort on f1 , . . . , fn , where fi is sorted before fj if fj occurs in the definition
of fi . Lean-auto will fail if there is a cyclic dependency between f1 , . . . , fn .
    The preprocessing stage also performs equational theorem generation. It col-
lects all maximal subexpressions of the input that do not contain logical symbols,
and generates equational theorems between them. These equational theorems are
also added to the list of premises.


Inductive Types: Currently, Lean-auto supports polymorphic, nested, and
mutual inductive types when SMT solvers are used as the backend ATP. For
other ATPs or unsupported inductive types, users can always manually supply
the properties related to the inductive types as a workaround.
27
     For simplicity, equational theorem generation is not shown in Algorithm 1.
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers         17

    The translation procedure for inductive types resembles monomorphization.
For a polymorphic inductive type T : ∀(α1 : Uℓ1 ) . . . (αn : Uℓn ).Uℓ , the trans-
lation attempts to find all relevant instances T α1 . . . αn , and translates each
instance to a monomorphic inductive type in the SMT solver. For mutual and
nested inductive types, the type of their constructors might contain other in-
ductive types not occurring in the input premises. These inductive types will be
recursively collected and monomorphized by the translation procedure.

Quantifier Introduction and Proof by Contradiction: To prepare for
monomorphization, Lean-auto performs quantifier introduction on the goal and
applies proof by contradiction. Suppose the goal is ∀(x1 : α1 ) . . . (xn : αn ).β.
Quantifier introduction will introduce x1 : α1 , . . . , xn : αn into the context and
replace the goal with β. Then, proof by contradiction will introduce the negation
of the the goal h : ¬β into the context and replace the goal with ⊥.

8     Experiments
We evaluate Lean-auto and existing tools on user-declared theorems in Math-
lib4,28 using version leanprover/lean4:v4.15.0 of Lean 4. A Lean 4 constant
is considered a user-declared theorem if it is marked as a theorem, is declared
somewhere in a .lean file,29 and is not a projection function. Due to technical
reasons,30 27762 of the 176904 user-declared theorems are excluded in our eval-
uation. Therefore, our benchmark set consists of 149142 theorems (problems).
Evaluation is conducted on an Amazon EC2 c5ad.16xlarge instance with 64
CPU cores and 128GB memory. Each theorem is given a time limit of 10 seconds.
Technical details of our experimental setup are discussed in Appendix L.
    Since our primary goal is to evaluate Lean-auto’s translation procedure, we
do not use premise selection in our evaluation. Instead, for each theorem T used
in the evaluation, we collect all the theorems used in T ’s human proof, and
send them to Lean-auto and existing tools as premises. This simple procedure
emulates an ideal premise selection algorithm.
    Three types of ATPs are used together with Lean-auto:
 1. Native provers, or ATPs implemented in Lean 4 itself. Currently, the only
    general-purpose native prover supported by Lean-auto is Duper [10]. Al-
    though Duper can accept Lean 4 problems directly, it has difficulty handling
    Lean 4 features such as typeclasses and definitional equality. Our small-scale
    experiment shows that Duper only works well when used as a backend of
    Lean-auto.31 Considering that we also encountered technical issues when we
    attempted full-scale evaluation using Duper without Lean-auto, we decided
    to not include “Duper without Lean-auto” in our evaluation.
28
   Commit 29f9a66d622d9bab7f419120e22bb0d2598676ab.
29
   We use Lean.findDeclarationRanges? to test whether a theorem is declared in a
   .lean file.
30
   Refer to Appendix L.
31
   Refer to Appendix K.
18      Y. Qian et al.

 2. TPTP solvers. We chose Zipperposition, a higher-order superposition prover.
    Lean-auto sends problems to Zipperposition in TPTP TH0 format.
 3. SMT solvers. For this category, we chose Z3 and CVC5. Since SMT solvers
    still don’t fully support HOL, we implemented a slightly modified version of
    the monomorphization procedure which generates FOL output. The modifi-
    cation introduces some extra incompleteness to the translation, which might
    have given Z3 and CVC5 a slight disadvantage.
    Currently, Lean-auto only supports proof reconstruction for native provers,
utilizing a verified checker implemented in Lean-auto. The independent ongoing
project Lean-smt32 aims to support SMT proof reconstruction in the future.
    We compare Lean-auto with the following existing tools:
 1. Lean 4’s built-in tactic rfl. The rfl tactic proves theorems of the form
    lhs = rhs where lhs is definitionally equal to rhs. Note that rfl does not
    accept premises.
 2. Lean 4’s built-in tactic simp_all. Similar to Lean-auto, simp_all accepts
    a list of user-provided premises. In Lean 4, users can tag theorems with
    the “simp” attribute. The simp_all tactic succeeds on a decent portion of
    Mathlib4 even if we do not supply it with premises, because it has access to
    the theorems tagged with the “simp” attribute, and will use these theorems
    to simplify the input expressions. Therefore, we evaluate simp_all in two
    different ways: with premises (“simp_all” in Figure 5) and without premises
    (“simp_all - p” in Figure 5).
 3. The rule-based proof search procedure Aesop [21]. Since Aesop invokes the
    simp_all tactic during its execution, it also benefits from theorems tagged
    with “simp.” We evaluate Aesop in two different ways: with premises33 (“Ae-
    sop” in Figure 5) and without premises (“Aesop - p” in Figure 5).
    Due to limited time and resources, this work does not compare Lean-auto
with hammers implemented in other ITPs. Differences in logical systems make it
very difficult to translate datasets between ITPs. For example, even though Lean
4 and Coq are both based on dependent type theory, they extend dependent
type theory in different ways.34 Translation procedures between Lean 4 and
Coq would need to modify expressions in nontrivial ways, which would cause
typechecking and definitional equality issues.
    Results are shown in Figure 5. For “simp_all”, “aesop,” and “Lean-auto,” we
show the results of their virtual best solvers (VBSes).35 We compute unique
solves among “rfl” and these three VBSes.
    We find that Lean-auto solves more problems than all existing tools. Specif-
ically, “Lean-auto + Duper”, which supports proof reconstruction, solves 36.6%
problems in our benchmark set, which is 5.0% better than the best previous tool
32
   GitHub link: https://github.com/ufmg-smite/lean-smt
33
   Specifically, for each premise p, we add (add unsafe p) to the aesop invocation
34
   For example, Cumulative Universe Levels in Coq and Quotient Types in Lean 4.
35
   The virtual best solver of a given category is equivalent to running all the tools in
   the given category in parallel and taking the first success produced.
  Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers             19




                                Solved     Unique Solves   Avg Time(ms)
        rfl                     19896           35              5.7
        simp_all - p             9833                           19.8
        simp_all                28096                           52.0
        simp_all VBS            28204           3035            44.4
        Aesop - p               33762                           61.3
        Aesop                   47060                           93.5
        Aesop VBS               48413           6512            92.2
        Lean-auto + Duper       54570                         1092.5
        Lean-auto + Z3          54210                          863.5
        Lean-auto + CVC5        54316                          808.0
        Lean-auto + Zipper.     54817                          774.9
        Lean-auto VBS           61906          22020           756.8
        Overall VBS             79396                          314.7


Fig. 5. Comparison with existing tools. Our benchmark set contains 149135 problems.




   Fig. 6. #Solved - Cumulative Time plot (left) and #Solved - Time plot (right)
20      Y. Qian et al.

“Aesop”. The fact that “Lean-auto VBS” achieves 14.8% unique solves shows that
Lean-auto is complementary to existing tools. The overall VBS, which combines
Lean-auto and all existing tools, solves more than half (53.2%) of the problems in
our benchmark set. On the other hand, Lean-auto is significantly slower than ex-
isting tools on solved problems. This is potentially caused by Lean-auto’s verified
checker and the frequent definitional equality testing in Lean-auto’s monomor-
phization.
    To better compare the performance of the various tools, we plot, for each
tool, the number of solved problems vs. solving time and cumulative solving
time. The results are shown in Figure 6. We see that Lean-auto is slower than
existing tools on simple problems, but eventually solves more problems than all
existing tools.


9    Conclusion
In this paper, we presented the ITP to ATP translation implemented in Lean-
auto. Our contributions are three-fold. First, we addressed challenges posed by
Lean 4’s dependent type theory and its various language features. Second, we
designed a novel monomorphization procedure for dependent type theory. Fi-
nally, we implemented the translation procedure in Lean-auto and evaluated it
on Mathlib4.
    A possible direction for future work is to design a complete λ∗→ abstraction
algorithm. Another direction is to investigate potential ways of handling exis-
tential type quantifiers and non-leading universal type quantifiers. We would
also like to further investigate causes of Lean-auto’s inefficiencies and improve
Lean-auto’s performance.

Acknowledgments. The authors thank: Prof. Jasmin Blanchette (Ludwig Maximil-
ian University of Munich) for insightful discussions on the monomorphization proce-
dure in Isabelle Sledgehammer; Mario Carneiro (Chalmers University of Technology)
for helping us understanding implementation details of Lean 4; and Leonardo de Moura
(Amazon Web Services) for his advice on the translation from Lean 4 to SMT solvers.
We also greatly appreciate the help of the Lean Zulip users who answered our ques-
tions related to Lean 4 and Mathlib4. This work was supported in part by the Stanford
Graduate Fellowship, the Stanford Center for Automated Reasoning, and AFRL and
DARPA under Agreement FA8750-24-9-1000.

Disclosure of Interests. Clark Barrett is an Amazon Scholar.


References
 1. Avigad, J., de Moura, L., Kong, S., Ullrich, S.: Theorem Proving in Lean4 (2025),
    https://leanprover.github.io/theorem_proving_in_lean4
 2. Barbosa, H., Barrett, C., Brain, M., Kremer, G., Lachnitt, H., Mann, M., Mo-
    hamed, A., Mohamed, M., Niemetz, A., Nötzli, A., Ozdemir, A., Preiner, M.,
    Reynolds, A., Sheng, Y., Tinelli, C., Zohar, Y.: cvc5: A versatile and industrial-
    strength SMT solver. In: Fisman, D., Rosu, G. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for
   Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers              21

    the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 415–442. Springer International
    Publishing, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_24
 3. Barendregt, H.P.: Lambda calculi with types, pp. 117–309. Oxford University
    Press, Inc., USA (1993), https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/162552.162561
 4. Barras, B., Boutin, S., Cornes, C., Courant, J., Filliâtre, J.C., Giménez, E., Her-
    belin, H., Huet, G.P., Muñoz, C.A., Murthy, C.R., Parent, C., Paulin-Mohring,
    C., Saïbi, A., Werner, B.: The Coq proof assistant : reference manual, version 6.1
    (1997), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:54117279
 5. Bhayat, A., Suda, M.: A higher-order Vampire (short paper). In: Benzmüller, C.,
    Heule, M.J., Schmidt, R.A. (eds.) Automated Reasoning. pp. 75–85. Springer Na-
    ture Switzerland, Cham (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-63498-7_
    5
 6. Blanchette, J.C., Kaliszyk, C., Paulson, L.C., Urban, J.: Hammering towards
    QED. J. Formaliz. Reason. 9, 101–148 (2016), https://api.semanticscholar.
    org/CorpusID:218028818
 7. Böhme, S.: Proving Theorems of Higher-Order Logic with SMT Solvers. Ph.D. the-
    sis, Technical University Munich (2012), https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:
    de:bvb:91-diss-20120511-1084525-1-4
 8. Bove, A., Dybjer, P., Norell, U.: A brief overview of Agda – a functional language
    with dependent types. In: Berghofer, S., Nipkow, T., Urban, C., Wenzel, M. (eds.)
    Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics. pp. 73–78. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
    Berlin, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03359-9_6
 9. Carneiro, M., Brown, C.E., Urban, J.: Automated theorem proving for Metamath.
    In: Naumowicz, A., Thiemann, R. (eds.) 14th International Conference on Interac-
    tive Theorem Proving (ITP 2023). Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
    (LIPIcs), vol. 268, pp. 9:1–9:19. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
    Dagstuhl, Germany (2023). https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ITP.2023.9
10. Clune, J., Qian, Y., Bentkamp, A., Avigad, J.: Duper: A proof-producing su-
    perposition theorem prover for dependent type theory. In: International Confer-
    ence on Interactive Theorem Proving (2024), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
    CorpusID:272330518
11. Coquand, T., Huet, G.: The calculus of constructions. Information and Computa-
    tion 76(2), 95–120 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(88)90005-3
12. Coquand, T., Paulin, C.: Inductively defined types. In: Martin-Löf, P., Mints,
    G. (eds.) COLOG-88. pp. 50–66. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg
    (1990). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-52335-9_47
13. Czajka, L., Kaliszyk, C.: Hammer for Coq: Automation for dependent type
    theory. Journal of Automated Reasoning 61, 423 – 453 (2018), https://api.
    semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11060917
14. Hall, C.V., Hammond, K., Jones, S.L.P., Wadler, P.: Type classes in Haskell. In:
    TOPL (1994), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9227770
15. Harrison, J.: Optimizing proof search in model elimination. In: McRobbie,
    M.A., Slaney, J.K. (eds.) Automated Deduction — Cade-13. pp. 313–327.
    Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/
    3-540-61511-3_97
16. Harrison, J., Urban, J., Wiedijk, F.: History of interactive theorem proving.
    In: Computational Logic (2014), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
    30345151
17. Hurd, J.: First-order proof tactics in higher-order logic theorem provers. De-
    sign and Application of Strategies/Tactics in Higher Order Logics, number
22      Y. Qian et al.

    NASA/CP-2003-212448 in NASA Technical Reports pp. 56–68 (2003), https:
    //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11201048
18. Kaliszyk, C., Urban, J.: Hol(y)hammer: Online ATP service for HOL light. Math-
    ematics in Computer Science 9(1), 5–22 (Mar 2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s11786-014-0182-0
19. Kaliszyk, C., Urban, J.: Mizar 40 for mizar 40. Journal of Automated Reasoning
    55(3), 245–256 (Oct 2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-015-9330-8
20. Kovács, L., Voronkov, A.: First-order theorem proving and Vampire. In: Sharygina,
    N., Veith, H. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification. pp. 1–35. Springer Berlin Heidel-
    berg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39799-8_
    1
21. Limperg, J., From, A.H.: Aesop: White-box best-first proof search for Lean. In:
    Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Pro-
    grams and Proofs. pp. 253–266. CPP 2023, Association for Computing Machinery,
    New York, NY, USA (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3573105.3575671
22. Mikuła, M., Tworkowski, S., Antoniak, S., Piotrowski, B., Jiang, A.Q., Zhou, J.P.,
    Szegedy, C., Kuciński, Ł., Miłoś, P., Wu, Y.: Magnushammer: A transformer-based
    approach to premise selection. ArXiv (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04488
23. de Moura, L., Bjørner, N.: Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In: Ramakrishnan,
    C.R., Rehof, J. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis
    of Systems. pp. 337–340. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24
24. de Moura, L.M., Ullrich, S.: The Lean 4 theorem prover and program-
    ming language. In: CADE (2021), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
    235800962
25. Paulson, L.C.: A generic tableau prover and its integration with Isabelle. J. Univers.
    Comput. Sci. 5, 73–87 (1999), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
    2551237
26. Paulson, L.C., Blanchette, J.C.: Three years of experience with Sledgehammer, a
    practical link between automatic and interactive theorem provers. In: IWIL@LPAR
    (2012), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:598752
27. Polu, S., Sutskever, I.: Generative language modeling for automated theorem
    proving. ArXiv abs/2009.03393 (2020), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
    CorpusID:221535103
28. Qian, Y., Clune, J., Barrett, C., Avigad, J.: Lean-auto: An interface between lean
    4 and automated theorem provers (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14929
29. Scholze, P.: Liquid tensor experiment. Experimental Mathematics 31(2), 349–354
    (2022). https://doi.org/10.1080/10586458.2021.1926016
30. Schulz, S.: E - a brainiac theorem prover. AI Commun. 15, 111–126 (2002), https:
    //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:884116
31. Sozeau, M., Tabareau, N.: Universe polymorphism in Coq. In: Klein, G., Gam-
    boa, R. (eds.) Interactive Theorem Proving. pp. 499–514. Springer International
    Publishing, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08970-6_32
32. The Mathlib Community: The Lean mathematical library. In: Proceedings of the
    9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs.
    pp. 367–381. CPP 2020, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
    USA (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3372885.3373824
33. Vukmirović, P., Bentkamp, A., Blanchette, J., Cruanes, S., Nummelin, V., Tourret,
    S.: Making higher-order superposition work. J. Autom. Reason. 66(4), 541–564
    (Nov 2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-021-09613-z
    Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers                   23

34. Vukmirović, P., Blanchette, J.C., Schulz, S.: Extending a high-performance prover
    to higher-order logic. In: International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for
    Construction and Analysis of Systems (2023), https://api.semanticscholar.
    org/CorpusID:249226027
35. Wenzel, M., Paulson, L.C., Nipkow, T.: The Isabelle framework. In: International
    Conference on Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics (2008), https://api.
    semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13752195
36. Yang, K., Deng, J.: Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof as-
    sistants. ArXiv abs/1905.09381 (2019), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
    CorpusID:162184110
37. Yang, K., Swope, A.M., Gu, A., Chalamala, R., Song, P., Yu, S., Godil, S., Prenger,
    R.J., Anandkumar, A.: Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented lan-
    guage models. ArXiv abs/2306.15626 (2023), https://api.semanticscholar.
    org/CorpusID:259262077


A     Logical Symbols of λC

                ⊥ := ∀p : U0 .p (¬) := λp : U0 .p → ⊥
               (∧) := λp q : U0 .∀r : U0 .(p → q → r) → r
               (∨) := λp q : U0 .∀r : U0 .(p → r) → (q → r) → r
              (↔) := λp q.(p → q) ∧ (q → p)
              (=ℓ ) := λα : Uℓ .λx y : α.∀p : α → U0 .(p x ↔ p y)
              (∃ℓ ) := λα : Uℓ .λp : α → U0 .∀q : U0 .((∀x : α.p x → q) → q)


B     Derivation Rules of PTS
The type judgement Γ ⊢ t : α in a PTS specified by (S, A, R) is defined by the
following axioms and rules:


    (axioms)                                                      if (s1 , s2 ) ∈ A
                        ∅ ⊢ s1 : s2
                           Γ ⊢A:s
    (start)                                                       if x ∈
                                                                       /Γ
                        Γ, x : A ⊢ x : A
                        Γ ⊢A:B Γ ⊢C:s
    (weakening)                                                   if x ∈
                                                                       /Γ
                           Γ, x : C ⊢ A : B
                        Γ ⊢ A : s1 Γ, x : A ⊢ B : s2
    (product)                                                     if (s1 , s2 , s3 ) ∈ R
                             Γ ⊢ (∀x : A.B) : s3
                        Γ ⊢ f : (∀x : A.B) Γ ⊢ a : A
    (application)
                              Γ ⊢ f a : B[x := a]
                        Γ, x : A ⊢ b : B Γ ⊢ (∀x : A.B) : s
    (abstraction)
                             Γ ⊢ (λx : A.b) : (∀x : A.B)
                        Γ ⊢ A : B Γ ⊢ B′ : s B ∼     = B′
    (conversion)
                                    Γ ⊢ A : B′
24      Y. Qian et al.

C    λC, λ→ and λ∗→
Definition 2. λC is the pure type system (S, A, R) where

                    S := {Uℓ |ℓ ∈ N}      A := {(Uℓ , Uℓ+1 )|ℓ ∈ N}

                     R := {(Uℓ , Um , Uimax(ℓ,m) )|ℓ ∈ N, m ∈ N}
                                       (
                                         max(m, n), n > 0
                       imax(m, n) :=
                                                     0, n = 0

Definition 3. λ→ is the pure type system (S, A, R) where

             S := {U1 , U′1 }   A := {(U1 , U′1 )}     R := {(U1 , U1 , U1 )}

This is equivalent to simply typed lambda calculus, where U1 and U′1 are usually
denoted as ∗ and □, respectively.

Definition 4. λ∗→ is the pure type system (S, A, R) where

            S := {Uℓ |ℓ ∈ N∗ } ∪ {U′ℓ |ℓ ∈ N∗ }      A := {(Uℓ , U′ℓ )|ℓ ∈ N∗ }

                   R := {(Uℓ , Um , Umax{l,m} )|ℓ ∈ N∗ , m ∈ N∗ }


D    HOL and HOL∗
Definition 5. HOL (HOL∗ ) is defined as λ→ (λ∗→ ) augmented with the follow-
ing symbols:
1. Bool
2. ⊥′ and →′
                       ∗
3. ∀′s , for each s ∈ T→ . Note that we are not requiring s to be a type here because
   the typing rules below will ensure that s must be a type in a well-formed ∀′s .
the following typing rules:

                            ⊢ Bool : U1      Γ ⊢ ⊥′ : Bool
                                                        Γ ⊢ s : Uℓ
          Γ ⊢→′ : Bool → Bool → Bool                ′
                                               Γ ⊢ ∀s : (s → Bool) → Bool
and the logical axioms and deduction rules of higher-order logic.

Note: The logical symbols ¬′ , ∧′ , ∨′ , ↔, =′s , ∃′s are defined in a way consistent
with their definition in λC:

          (¬′ ) := λ(p : Bool).(p →′ ⊥′ )
          (∧′ ) := λ(p q : Bool).∀(r : Bool).((p →′ q →′ r) →′ r)
          (∨′ ) := λ(p q : Bool).∀(r : Bool).((p →′ r) →′ (q →′ r) →′ r)
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers                    25

           (↔′ ) := λ(p q : Bool).((p →′ q) ∧′ (q →′ p))
           (=′s ) := λ(x y : s).∀(p : s → Bool).(p x ↔′ p y)
            (∃′s ) := λ(p : s → Bool).∀(q : Bool).((∀(x : s).p x →′ q) →′ q)

   We use ∀′ (x : s).t as a shorthand for ∀′s (λ(x : s).t), and ∃′ (x : α).t as a
shorthand for ∃′s (λ(x : s).t).
   For simplicity, the HOL∗ system we present in this paper only contains one
symbol Bool for the type of propositions. In the implementation of Lean-auto,
the HOL∗ system have a symbol Boolℓ : Uℓ for each universe level ℓ, and each
universe level have its own copy of logical symbols.


E      Universe Lifting
In this appendix, we discuss the translation procedure from HOL∗ to HOL in
Lean-auto. For simplicity, universe lifting as presented in this section differs from
Lean-auto’s implementation in terms of how Bool is handled.
   First, we show that HOL∗ and HOL are, in a sense, equivalent to each other.

Definition 6. Let ρ∗ : T→
                        ∗
                          → T→ be the mapping that forgets the universe levels,
i.e.
ρ∗ (Bool) := Bool          ρ∗ (Uℓ ) := U1         ρ∗ (U′ℓ ) := U′1     ρ∗ (x) := x, for x ∈ V
 ∗                 ∗       ∗
ρ (M N ) := ρ (M ) ρ (N )               ρ (λ(x : s).M ) := λ(x : ρ (s)).ρ∗ (M )
                                         ∗                            ∗

ρ∗ (⊥′ ) := ⊥′         ρ∗ (→′ ) :=→′          ρ∗ (∀′s ) := ∀′ρ∗ (s)

ρ∗ is extended to contexts as follows: ρ∗ (∅) := ∅; ρ∗ (Γ, x : σ) := ρ(Γ ), x : ρ(σ)
                             ∗
Definition 7. Let ρℓ : T→ → T→ (ℓ ∈ N∗ ) be the mapping that turns U1 into Uℓ ,
i.e.
    ρ(Bool) := Bool            ρ(U1 ) := Uℓ       ρ(U′1 ) := U′ℓ      ρ(x) := x, for x ∈ V
    ρ(M N ) := ρ(M ) ρ(N )             ρ(λ(x : s).M ) := λ(x : ρ(s)).ρ(M )
    ρ(⊥′ ) := ⊥′        ρ(→′ ) :=→′           ρ(∀′s ) := ∀′ρ(s)

ρ is extended to contexts as follows: ρ(∅) := ∅; ρ(Γ, x : σ) := ρ(Γ ), x : ρ(σ)

Theorem 1. For all t ∈ T→ , ρ∗ℓ (ρℓ (t)) = t.
Proof. Induction on the construction rules of T→ .

Theorem 2. Forgetting universe levels preserves judgement, i.e., if Γ ⊢ t : s in
HOL∗ , then ρ∗ (Γ ) ⊢ ρ∗ (t) : ρ∗ (s) in HOL.
Proof. Induction on the derivation rules of HOL∗ .

Theorem 3. ρℓ preserves judgement, i.e., if Γ ⊢ t : s in HOL, then ρℓ (Γ ) ⊢
ρℓ (t) : ρℓ (s) in HOL∗ .
26         Y. Qian et al.

Proof. Induction on the derivation rules of HOL.
Theorem 4. HOL∗ and HOL are equivalent, i.e., if Γ ⊢ p : Bool in HOL∗ and
p is provable in HOL∗ , then ρ∗ (p) is provable in HOL; if Γ ⊢ p : Bool in HOL
and p is provable in HOL, then ρℓ (p) is provable in HOL∗ for any ℓ ∈ N∗ .
Proof. Let D be a proof of p in HOL∗ , the a proof of ρ∗ (p) in HOL can be obtained
by forgetting universe levels in D. The converse can be proved in a similar way.
The universe lifting procedure in Lean-auto is the translation of HOL∗ to HOL
in the context of λC. In other words, it is the translation of the embedding of
HOL in λC into an embedding of HOL∗ in λC.
Definition 8. The ℓ-embedding πℓ : T→ → TC of HOL into λC is defined as
πℓ := π ∗ ◦ ρℓ , where π ∗ is the canonical embedding of HOL∗ into λC.36
Definition 9. A universe lifting facility consists of three families of functions
 1. GLiftu,v : Uu → Umax{u,v+1}
 2. GLift.upu,v : ∀(α : Uu ). α → GLiftu,v α
 3. GLift.downu,v : ∀(α : Uu ). GLiftu,v α → α
where u, v ∈ N, such that they satisfy the following bijectivity condition:

            ∀(α : Uu ).GLift.upu,v α ◦ GLift.downu,v α = λ(x : GLiftu,v α).x

                 ∀(α : Uu ).GLift.downu,v α ◦ GLift.upu,v α = λ(x : α).x
In Lean 4, universe lifting facility can be realized by the following inductive type:
structure GLift.{u, v} (α : Sort u) : Sort (max u (v + 1)) where
  /-- Lift a value into ‘GLift α‘ -/    up ::
  /-- Extract a value from ‘GLift α‘ -/ down : α


Theorem 5. Assume the existence of a universe lifting facility in λC. Then,
for all ℓ ∈ N, there exists two families of λC functions

                      Ups : s → UpType s          Downs : UpType s → s

for sorts s : Uℓ′ , ℓ′ ≤ ℓ + 1, satisfying the bijectivity conditions

             Ups ◦ Downs = λ(x : UpType s).x           Downs ◦ Ups = λ(x : s).s

and the congruence condition

                    ∀(f : α → β). Upβ (f x) = (Upα→β f ) (Upα x)

where UpType is recursively defined as follows:
                              UpType x := GLiftℓ′ ,ℓ x, for x ∈ V
                      UpType (α → β) := UpType α → UpType β
36
     See Appendix F for the definition of π ∗ .
    Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers         27

Proof. Structural induction on s

1. If s = a, where a ∈ V is a variable, then we can define

                    Upa := GLift.upℓ′ ,ℓ a    Downa := Glift.downℓ′ ,ℓ a

2. If s = (α → β) and the induction hypothesis holds for α and β, then we can
   define

          Upα→β := λ(f : α → β) (x : UpType α). Upβ (f (Downα x))
        Downα→β := λ(f : UpType α → UpType β) (x : α). Downβ (f (Upα x))


    The rationale of UpType (α → β) := UpType α → UpType β is that, given
f x in the canonical embedding of HOL∗ , where f : α → β and x : α, we would
like (Upα→β f ) (Upα x) to be type correct.
    Given Ups , Downs and UpType satisfying Theorem 5 with ℓ taken to be larger
than all universe levels in the input terms, the universe lifting procedure, or the
translation of the canonical embedding of HOL∗ into the ℓ-embedding of HOL,
denoted as ULiftTrans, works as follows:

 1. If x is a variable and x : s, then ULiftTrans(x) := x′ . If x is not a free
    variable, then we define x′ as x′ := Ups x in Lean 4. If x is a bound variable,
    no further operation is needed.
 2. ULiftTrans(f x) := ULiftTrans(f ) ULiftTrans(x)
 3. ULiftTrans(λ(x : s). y) := λ(x′ : UpType s). ULiftTrans(y)

   It’s easy to verify that ULiftTrans(e) is definitionally equal to Ups e for all
terms e : s in the canonical embedding of HOL∗ .


F     Essentially Higher-order Problem

In this appendix, we give a formal definition of essentially higher-order problems
(EHOPs) and discuss some of its theoretical properties.

Definition 10. Let σ : V → TC be a mapping. Define its extension σ : TC → TC
as

     σ(Uℓ ) := Uℓ      σ(x) := σ(x), for x ∈ V          σ(M N ) := σ(M ) σ(M )

                       σ(λx : s.M ) := λx : σ(s).σ[x 7→ x](M )
                       σ(∀x : s.M ) := ∀x : σ(s).σ[x 7→ x](M )
where                                    (
                                          t        x=u
                        σ[u → t](x) :=
                                             σ(x) x ∈ V \{u}
28            Y. Qian et al.

Definition 11. A substitution is a triple (Γ, Γ ′ , σ) where Γ, Γ ′ are λC contexts
and σ : V → TC , such that for all (u : τ ) ∈ Γ ,

                                          Γ ′ ⊢ σ(u) : σ(τ )

Γ is called the domain of the substitution, and Γ ′ is called the codomain of the
substitution.

Theorem 6. Let (Γ, Γ ′ , σ) be a substitution. If Γ ⊢ t : s, then Γ ′ ⊢ σ(t) : σ(s)

Proof. Induction on the derivation of Γ ⊢ t : s.

Definition 12. Let Γ be a λC context and t1 , t2 be λC terms. If variable set M
and substitution (Γ, Γ ′ , σ) satisfies

 1. There exists a λC term s such that Γ ′ ⊢ σ(t1 ) : s and Γ ′ ⊢ σ(t2 ) : s.
 2. σ(t1 ) ∼
           = σ(t2 ) (i.e., σ(t1 ) and σ(t2 ) are βη-equivalent)
 3. For all variables v ∈ Γ \M , σ(v) = v.

Then (Γ, Γ ′ , σ) is called a M -unifier of t1 and t2 . In the context of Lean, this
corresponds to a unifier of t1 and t2 under context Γ , with M as the set of
metavariables.

Definition 13. The canonical embedding π ∗ : T→
                                              ∗
                                                → TC of HOL∗ into λC is
defined as follows:

π ∗ (Bool) := U0            π ∗ (Uℓ ) := Uℓ      π ∗ (U′ℓ ) := Uℓ+1       π ∗ (x) := x, for x ∈ V
π ∗ (M N ) := π ∗ (M ) π ∗ (N )           π ∗ (λ(x : s).M ) := λ(x : π ∗ (s)).π ∗ (M )
π ∗ (⊥′ ) := ∀(α : U0 ).α               π ∗ (→′ ) := λ(p q : U0 ).p → q
    ∗
π       (∀′s ) := λ(p : π ∗ (s) → U0 ).∀(x : π ∗ (s)).p x

π ∗ is extended to contexts as follows: π ∗ (∅) := ∅, π ∗ (Γ, x : σ) := π ∗ (Γ ), x : π ∗ (σ)

Theorem 7. Canonical embedding preserves judgement, i.e. if Γ ⊢ t : s in
HOL∗ , then π ∗ (Γ ) ⊢ π ∗ (t) : π ∗ (s) in λC

Proof. Induction on the derivation rules of HOL∗ .

Definition 14. An (HOL∗ /λC) problem is a tuple (Γ, p), denoted as Γ ⊢?p,
where Γ is a (HOL∗ /λC) context, called the hypotheses of the problem, and p
is an (HOL∗ /λC) term, called the goal of the problem. A λC problem Γ ⊢?p
is provable iff there exists a λC term t such that Γ ⊢ t : p. An HOL∗ problem
Γ ⊢?p is provable iff there exists a λC term t such that π ∗ (Γ ) ⊢ t : π ∗ (p).

Definition 15. A λC problem Γ ⊢?p is essentially higher-order provable (EH-
OP) iff there exists a provable HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′ and a substitution (π ∗ (Γ ′ ),
Γ, σ) such that p ∼
                  = σ(π ∗ (p′ )).37
37
     This is the same as Definition 1 in Sect. 5.
   Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers             29

Theorem 8. If a λC problem Γ ⊢?p is EHOP, then it is provable.
Proof. By the definition of EHOP, there exists a provable HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′
and substitution (π ∗ (Γ ′ ), Γ, σ) such that p ∼= σ(π ∗ (p′ )). By the definition of
    ∗
HOL provability, there exists a term t such that π ∗ (Γ ′ ) ⊢ t′ : π ∗ (p′ ). By
                                             ′

Theorem 7, Γ ⊢ σ(t′ ) : σ(π ∗ (p′ )), thus Γ ⊢?p is provable.
    We assume that excluded middle is implicitly contained in the hypotheses of
all HOL∗ and λC problems. In λC, excluded middle is em : ∀(p : U0 ), p ∨ ¬p; in
HOL∗ , it is em′ : ∀(p : Bool).p ∨′ ¬′ p.
Example 1. Consider the λC problem Γ ⊢?p where

    Γ := N : U1 , Fin : N → U1 , add : ∀(n : N).(Fin n → Fin n → Fin n), n : N
     p := (∀(u v : Fin n).add n u v =1 add n v u) →
             ∀(u v w : Fin n).add n (add n x y) z =1 add n z (add n y x)

Given

                Γ ′ := α : U1 , f : α → α → α
                p′ := (∀′ (u v : α).f u v =′α f v u) →′
                         ∀′ (u v w : α).f (f u v) w =′α f w (f v u)

The HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′ is provable. Moreover, given

                           σ(α) := Fin n, σ(f ) := add n

The triple (π ∗ (Γ ′ ), Γ, σ) forms a substitution, and p ∼
                                                          = σ(π ∗ (p′ )). Therefore,
Γ ⊢?p is EHOP.
  Note that moving implications in the goal into hypotheses (and vice versa)
may change the EHOP status of a problem. For example,

                     α : U1 , x : α, p : α → U0 ⊢? (p x → p x)

is EHOP. However, if we introduce p x into the hypotheses, the problem is no
longer EHOP:
                  α : U1 , x : α, p : α → U0 , h : p x ⊢? p x            (2)
Theorem 9. The λC problem (2) is provable but not EHOP.
Proof. Note that h : p x under the hypotheses of (2), thus (2) is provable. To
show that (2) is not EHOP, we use proof by contradiction. Suppose there is an
HOL∗ problem Γ ′ ⊢?p′ and a substitution (Γ ′ , Γ, σ) such that p x ∼   = σ(π ∗ (p′ )).
                                  ′
Then, the βη normal form of p must be of the form f t1 . . . tk where f is a
free variable. Note that Γ ′ , as a context of λ∗→ , consists solely of HOL∗ (type
or term) variable declarations, and cannot contain premises like λC contexts.
Note that there exists models where f t1 . . . tk is false, for example when f is
a function that takes k arguments and always returns ⊥. Therefore, Γ ′ ⊢?p′ is
not provable in HOL∗ , thus (2) is not EHOP.
30       Y. Qian et al.

G     λ∗→ Abstraction Algorithm
In this appendix, we give a formal presentation of the λ∗→ abstraction algorithm.
When given a λC problem Γ ⊢?p, the algorithm attempts to find a λ∗→ problem
Γ ′ ⊢?p′ and a substitution (π ∗ (Γ ′ ), Γ, σ) such that p ∼
                                                           = σ(π ∗ (p′ )), and that p′
retains as much information in p as possible.
    Note that the output of Lean-auto’s quantifier instantiation is a list of λC
terms h1 , . . . , hn , and we would like to prove ⊥ using these terms. Suppose the
λC context of the problem is Γ . According to the above discussion, the input
to the λ∗→ abstraction algorithm should be Γ ⊢? (h1 → · · · → hn → ⊥). In
practice, we run λ∗→ abstraction consecutively on each of hi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) under
context Γ , which produces equivalent results. Therefore, we can either think of
the input of λ∗→ abstraction as one λC term h1 → · · · → hn → ⊥, or as a list of
λC terms h1 , . . . , hn .
    First, we give a formal definition of dependent arguments. This definition
accounts for the fact that dependent arguments are dynamic. Note that in the
argument list of functions, dependent and non-dependent arguments may inter-
leave with each other.

Definition 16. Suppose Γ ⊢ s : Ul in λC. If s = (∀(x : s1 ).s2 ) and x oc-
curs in s2 , then s is said to be a Γ -leading argument dependent type, denoted
as LADT(Γ ; s). Suppose Γ ⊢ t : s in λC, where s is in β normal form. If
LADT(Γ ; s), then t is said to be Γ -leading argument dependent (Γ -lad), denoted
as LAD(Γ ; t).

Definition 17. Suppose the term a0 a1 . . . ak is type correct under context Γ
in λC. Then for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, a0 is said to have dependent i-th argument with
respect to Γ and argument list (a1 , . . . , ak ), or i-dep w.r.t Γ and (a1 , . . . , ak ), iff
LAD(Γ ; a0 a1 . . . ai−1 ). For convenience, we use the predicate

                     Dep(Γ ; a0 , (a1 , . . . , ak ), i)   (k ≥ 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ k)

to denote that a0 is i-dep w.r.t Γ and (a1 , . . . , ak ). Furthermore, we define

       LFun(Γ ; a0 , (a1 , . . . , ak )) := λ(xi1 : si1 ) . . . (xim : sim ).a0 w1 . . . wm

                       DArgs(Γ ; a0 , (a1 , . . . , ak )) := (bi1 , . . . , bim )
                     LArgs(Γ ; a0 , (a1 , . . . , ak )) := (aj1 , . . . , ajk−m )
where i1 < i2 < · · · < im are all the arguments that are dependent, j1 < j2 <
· · · < jk−m are all the arguments that are non-dependent, Γ ⊢ ai : si , and
                             (
                               ai , Dep(Γ ; a0 , (a1 , . . . , ak ), i)
                       wi :=
                              xi ,                      otherwise

Example 2. Let

      Γ := compose : ∀(β γ : U1 ).(β → γ) → ∀(α : U1 ).(α → β) → (α → γ),
  Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers                    31

           A : U1 , B : U1 , C : U1 , f : B → C, g : A → B, x : A

Then
                        compose, compose B, compose B C f
are Γ -lad, while

              compose B C, compose B C f A, compose B C f A g

are not. Therefore, the dependent arguments of compose w.r.t (B, C, f, A, g, x)
are 1, 2 and 4, and we have

     LFun(Γ ; compose, (A, B, C, f, g, x)) = λ(f : B → C).compose A B f C

                    LArgs(Γ ; compose, (A, B, C, f, g, x)) = (f, g, x)
Example 3. Let

              Γ := func : ∀(α : U1 → U1 ) (β : U1 ).α β, A : U1 , B : U1

Then func is Γ -lad, while

                    func (λβ.A) : U1 → A          func (λβ.A) B : A

are not. Therefore, the dependent argument of func w.r.t (λβ.A, B) is 1, and we
have

   LFun(Γ ; func, (λβ.A, B)) = func (λβ.A)           LArgs(Γ ; func, (λβ.A, B)) = B

    Now, we define quasi-monomorphic terms, the set of λC terms that λ∗→ ab-
straction can successfully translate to HOL∗ . The predicate QMono(Γ ; B, t) will
be used to represent “t is a quasi-monomorphic term under context Γ , with
variables in B being bound variables”. It is used both in λ∗→ abstraction and in
quantifier instantiation.
Definition 18. We define the predicate QMono(Γ ; B, t) inductively, where Γ is
a λC context, B is a set of variables, and t is a λC term
1. For variable x ∈ B and terms t1 , . . . , tn ,

            QMono(Γ ; B, x t1 . . . tn ) := DArgs(Γ ; x, (t1 . . . tn )) = ∅∧
                                              ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.QMono(Γ ; B, ti )
2. For variable x ∈
                  / B and terms t1 , . . . , tn ,

    QMono(Γ ; B, x t1 . . . tn ) := (∀t ∈ DArgs(Γ ; x, (t1 , . . . , tn )).F V (t) ∩ B = ∅)∧
                                     (∀t ∈ LArgs(Γ ; x, (t1 , . . . , tn )).QMono(Γ ; B, t))
3. For variable x and terms s, t

              QMono(Γ ; B, λ(x : s).t) := F V (s) ∩ B = ∅ ∧ (Γ ̸⊢ s : U0 )
                                               ∧ QMono(Γ, x : s; B ∪ {x}, t)
32       Y. Qian et al.

4. For variable x and terms s, t such that x ∈ F V (t),
      QMono(Γ ; B, ∀(x : s).t) := ¬F V (s) ∩ B = ∅ ∧ (Γ ̸⊢ s : U0 ) ∧ (Γ ⊢ t : U0 )∧
                                   QMono(Γ, x : s; B ∪ {x}, t)
5. For terms s, t,
              QMono(Γ ; B, s → t) := (Γ ⊢ s : U0 ) ∧ (Γ ⊢ t : U0 )∧
                                        QMono(Γ ; B, s) ∧ QMono(Γ ; B, t)
According to the definition of QMono, terms coming from canonical embedding
of HOL∗ terms are automatically quasi-monomorphic, e.g.
               QMono(α : U1 , p : (α → α) → U0 ; ∅, ∀(p : α → α).f p)
Proofs are not allowed to be quantified by λ or dependent ∀ binders:
                     ¬QMono(p : U0 , q : p → U0 ; ∅, ∀(x : p).q x)
Occurrence of a dependently typed free variable does not break the quasi-
monomorphic property iff its dependent arguments do not contain bound vari-
ables (assuming B = ∅):
     QMono(N : U1 , Fin : N → U1 , add : ∀(n : N).Fin n → Fin n → Fin n, k : N;
             ∅, ∀(x y : Fin k).add k x y = add k y x)
Occurrence of a dependently typed bound variable does not break the quasi-
monomorphic property iff its dependent arguments are not instantiated:
      QMono(∅; ∅, λ(f : (∀(α : U0 ).α) → (∀(α : U0 ).α)) (x : ∀(α : U0 ).α).f x)
Except for within type declarations of bound variables, bodies of ∀ abstractions
must be propositions:
                    ¬QMono(α : U1 , β : α → U1 ; ∅, ∀(x : α).β x)
   Now, we describe the λ∗→ abstraction procedure lamAbst of Lean-auto. The
algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2. A global hash map H is used to record the
HOL∗ variables associated with abstracted λC terms. A few auxiliary functions
are used in the algorithm:
1. For a term t, if t is in H, then getLVarName(t) returns the HOL∗ free variable
   corresponding to t, otherwise it creates a new HOL∗ free variable for t.
2. For a term t = w t1 . . . tn where w is not an application, getAppFn(t) =
   w, getAppArgs(t) = (t1 , . . . , tn ).
3. For terms w, t1 , . . . , tn , mkAppN(w, (t1 , . . . , tn )) = w t1 . . . tn .
4. For a context Γ and a term t, inferType(Γ, t) computes the β-normal form
   of the type of t under Γ .
Note that lamAbst only returns the HOL∗ problem (as a HOL∗ term). The
“substitution” from HOL∗ to λC needs to be obtained by computing the inverse
of H after the execution of the algorithm. Also, note that the implementation of
this algorithm in Lean-auto checks whether t breaks the requirements of quasi-
monomorphic-ness and fails if it does. For simplicity, these checks have been
omitted in lamAbst.
Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers   33




Function lamAbst(Γ ; B, t)
   In : λC context Γ , variable set B, and λC term t satisfying
         QMono(Γ ; B, t)
   Out : a λ∗→ term
   match t with
      case a b /* Function application */
          f := getAppFn(t)
          args := getAppArgs(t)
          if f ∈ B then
              for a : args do
                  a := lamAbst(Γ ; B, a)
              return mkAppN(f, args)
          lf := LFun(Γ ; f, args)
          largs := LArgs(Γ ; f, args)
          lvar := getLVarName(lf )
          return mkAppN(lvar , largs)
      case ∀(v : a).b
          atype := inferType(Γ ; a)
          babst := lamAbst(Γ, v : a; B ∪ {v}, b)
          if atype = U0 then
              aabst := lamAbst(Γ ; B, a)
              return aabst → babst
          return ∀(v : a).babst
      case λ(v : a).b
          babst := lamAbst(Γ, v : a; B ∪ {v}, b)
          return λ(v : a).babst
      otherwise
          return getLVarName(t)
end

Function getLVarName(t)
   In : λC term t
   Out : λ∗→ variable name corresponding to t
   if H.contains(t) then
       return H.find(t)
   newname := freshVarName()
   H.add(t, newname)
   return newname
end
       Algorithm 2: λ∗→ abstraction algorithm of Lean-auto
34      Y. Qian et al.

H     Quantifier Instantiation
In this appendix, we present the technical details of Lean-auto’s quantifier in-
stantiation procedure. First, we give a formal definition of instance:
Definition 19. Let Γ be a λC context, and t be a λC term which is type correct
under Γ .
1. A constant instance of t is a λC term of the form λ(x1 : s1 ) . . . (xm :
   sm ).t t1 . . . tk that is type correct under Γ , where s1 , . . . , sm , t1 , . . . tk are
   λC terms.
2. For t = ∀(x1 : r1 ) . . . (xn : rn ).b, a hypothesis instance of t is a λC term of the
   form ∀(y1 : s1 ) . . . (ym : sm ).b[t1 /x1 ] . . . [tn /xn ], where s1 , . . . , sm , t1 , . . . , tn
   are λC terms, and t1 [t2 /x] stands for the term obtained by replacing all the
   x in t1 with t2 .
    Unless otherwise stated, when discussing instances of functions, we will al-
ways be referring to constant instances; when discussing instances of hypotheses,
we will always be referring to hypothesis instances. An instance of a function is
called an HOL∗ instance iff all of the function’s dependent arguments are in-
stantiated with terms that do not contain bound variables. Formally, the set of
all HOL∗ instances in a λC term is defined as follows:
Definition 20. Let Γ be a λC context and B be a set of variables, then
1. For variable x and terms t1 , . . . , tn ,
                                                        (
                                                         S ∪ {l},       F V (l) ∩ B = ∅
                holInsts(Γ ; B, x t1 . . . tn ) :=
                                                                  S,            otherwise
     where
                                                                   [
       l := LFun(Γ ; x, (t1 . . . tn ))          S :=                                 holInsts(Γ ; V, t)
                                                        t∈LArgs(Γ ;x,(t1 ,...,tn ))

2. For variable x and terms a, b,
                    holInsts(Γ ; B, ∀(x : a).b) = holInsts(Γ ; B, λ(x : a).b)
                       := holInsts(Γ ; B, a) ∪ holInsts(Γ, x : a; B ∪ {x}, b)
3. Otherwise, holInsts(Γ ; B, t) := ∅.
   The matching procedure in the saturation loop is handled by matchInst and
match.
1. Given context Γ , variable set M and terms m, h, match(Γ ; M, m, h) returns
   all M -unifiers between term m and the LFun of subterms of h. The pseu-
   docode for match is given in Algorithm 3. An auxiliary function unify is used
   in the pseudocode. Given λC context Γ , variable set M and two λC terms
   t1 , t2 , unify(Γ ; M, t1 , t2 ) returns a complete set of M -unifiers of t1 and t2
   under Γ . In Lean 4, the isDefEq function can be used perform unification,
   but it is incomplete and returns at most one unifier.
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers              35

      Function match(Γ ; M, m, h)
         In : λC context Γ , variable set M , and λC terms m, h
         Out : A set of unifiers
         match h with
            case a b /* Function application */
                matches := ∅
                f := getAppFn(t)
                args := getAppArgs(t)
                for a : args do
                    matches := union(matches, match(Γ ; M, m, a))
                lf := LFun(Γ ; f, arg)
                matches := union(matches, unify(Γ ; M, m, lf ))
            case ∀(v : a).b
                return union(match(Γ ; M, m, a), match(Γ, v : a; M, m, b))
            case λ(v : a).b
                return union(match(Γ ; M, m, a), match(Γ, v : a; M, m, b))
            otherwise
                return ∅
      end
          Algorithm 3: Matching algorithm for quantifier instantiation


 2. Given context Γ and terms m, h, matchInst(Γ ; m, h) computes all instances
    of the hypothesis h which has some subterm whose LFun is βη-equivalent
    to m. To do this, matchInst introduces all leading non-prop ∀ quantifiers
    into the context (as free variables), collects all the newly introduced free
    variables into a variable set M , then computes match(Γ ′ ; M, m, h′ ), where
    Γ ′ , h′ are Γ, h after introduction of free variables. For each unifier (Γ, Γ ′ , σ)
    in match(Γ ′ ; M, m, h), matchInst computes σ(h), then abstracts newly in-
    troduced free variables in σ as ∀ binders to generate an instance of h.
    matchInst(Γ ; m, h) returns the set of instances of h generated by this proce-
    dure.
    The saturation loop of quantifier instantiation is shown in Algorithm 4.38 For
simplicity, equational theorem generation is not shown here. Given a λC context
Γ and a list H of hypotheses, saturate returns a list of instances of hypotheses in
H that are suitable for λ∗→ abstraction (i.e. satisfy the QMono predicate). Note
that, in Lean-auto, when checking whether a hypothesis instance belongs to a
collection (e.g., set, list, queue, etc.) of hypothesis instances, we test equality
only up to hypothesis equivalence.
Definition 21. For two λC terms t1 , t2 , t1 and t2 are equivalent as hypotheses
iff t1 is a hypothesis instance of t2 and t2 is a hypothesis instance of t1 .39
    Checking membership up to equivalence ensures that collections of hypothesis
instances in our algorithms are free of redundant entries. Note that equivalence
38
     This is the same as Algorithm 1 in Sect. 6.
39
     In higher-order logic and beyond, there exists terms that are instances of each other
     but not definitionally equal.
36       Y. Qian et al.




     Function saturate(Γ ; H, maxInsts)
        In : λC context Γ , list of λC terms H, and threshold maxInsts
        Out : A list of λC terms
        hi := H /* A list of hypothesis instances */
        ci := List.empty() /* A list of constant instances */
        /* A queue of active constant and hypothesis instances */
        active := Queue.empty()
        for h : H do
            hi.push((0, h))
            for c : holInsts(Γ ; ∅, h) do
                ci.push(c); active.push((1, c))
        while ! active.empty() do
            if hi.size() + ci.size() > maxInsts then break
            (type, front) := active.front()
            active.popFront()
            if type = 0 then
                prevci := ci.copy()
                for c : prevci do
                     matchOnePair(c, front, ci, hi, active)
            else
                prevhi := hi.copy()
                for h : prevhi do
                     matchOnePair(front, h, ci, hi, active)
            end
        end
        monohi := List.empty()
        for h : hi do
            if QMono(Γ ; ∅, h) then monohi.push(h)
        return monohi
     end

     Function matchOnePair(c, h, ci, hi, active)
        newhi := matchInst(Γ ; c, h)
        for nh : newhi do
            if nh ∈ hi then continue
            hi.push(nh); active.push((0, nh))
            newci := holInsts(Γ ; ∅, nh)
            for nc : newci do
                if nc ∈ ci then continue
                ci.push(nc); active.push((1, nc))
     end
        Algorithm 4: Main saturation loop of quantifier instantiation
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers           37

testing can be reduced to unification, which can in turn be approximated by
isDefEq.


I      Experiment on Translation

In this appendix, we present the result of our small-scale experiment on the com-
parison between encoding-based translation and monomorphization. We would
like to compare the output sizes of the translation procedures on the same Lean 4
problem. For monomorphization, we use Lean-auto’s translation procedure and
compute the sum of the sizes of the output HOL problem. Since Lean-auto does
not support encoding-based translation, we use the size of the original Lean 4
expression as the surrogate for the output size. This is justified by the fact that
encoding-based translations usually produce outputs that are larger than the
input problems.
    We randomly sample 512 user-declared theorems from Mathlib4. For each
theorem, we generate its corresponding problem, which consists of the statement
of the theorem and the statements of all the theorems used in its proof. The
size of a problem is the sum of the sizes of all the expressions in the problem.
We use Lean 4’s deterministic timeout mechanism and set “maxHeartbeats” to
“65536” for the monomorphization of each problem, without imposing extra time
or memory limit.
    Note that Lean-auto’s monomorphization is incomplete, and it might be un-
fair to compare monomorphization with encoding-based translation on prob-
lems where monomorphization fails to produce a provable output. Therefore,
we conduct another experiment with the Lean-auto-provable40 subset of the 512
problems. Note that if a problem is proved by Lean-auto, Lean-auto’s monomor-
phization must have produced a provable output on the problem, regardless of
the backend solver.


                                                 Full        Filtered
                       #Theorems                 512            188
                         #Fails                   88             0
                       Avg enc size             1503.4         643.5
                      Avg mono size             112.3           62.6
                 Avg (mono size)/(enc size)     0.2325        0.2308


                       Fig. 7. Result of experiment on translation



   The result is presented in Figure 7. “#Fails” is the number of theorems where
Lean-auto’s monomorphization produces error. Failed theorems are not included
40
     Here we use Duper as the backend solver, and employ Experimental Setup 1 described
     in Appendix L. The option “auto.mono.ignoreNonQuasiHigherOrder” is set to “true”,
     and “maxHeartbeats” is set to “65536”.
38     Y. Qian et al.

when computing statistics. “Avg enc size” is the average size of the output of
encoding-based translation. As mentioned before, we use the size of the original
problem as an under-approximation. “Avg mono size” is the average size of the
monomorphized problem. “Avg (mono size)/(enc size)” is the average ratio of
the monomorphized size and the encoding-based size. The result indicates that
monomorphization produces significantly smaller results compared to encoding-
based translation.


J    Experiment on Reduction

In this appendix, we investigate the possibility of reducing the input expressions
before sending them to Lean-auto. When reducing expressions, Lean 4 allows
users to control which constants are unfolded, with three transparency levels: re-
ducible, default and all. In the reducible level, only a small portion of constants
are unfolded. Lean-auto reduces all input expressions with the reducible level,
because this helps alleviate the definitional equality problem, and usually don’t
increase the expression size by too much. In the default level, most non-theorem
constants are reduced. Reducing with default level will make many definitionally
equal input expressions become syntactically identical, but might make the ex-
pressions become unacceptably large. In the all level, all constants are unfolded
(except for those marked with the special tag opaque). Reducing with all level
will produce even larger expressions than with the default level.
    We use the same 512 Mathlib4 theorems in Appendix I, and generate their
corresponding problems in the same way. Experiment is conducted on Amazon
EC2 c5ad.16xlarge. The time limit for each problem is 120 seconds, and the
memory limit is 8GB.


                                   reducible      default        all
                #Fails                 0             83          202
            Avg size before          791.5         588.3        487.7
             Avg size after         2449.8     138579513.0   258118331.0
           Avg size increase         5.8×       309146.5×    1216555.0×
            #10× increase             48            215          151
        #10× increase + #Fails        48            298          353


            Fig. 8. Result of experiment on reducing input expressions


    The result is presented in Figure 8. “#Fails” is the number of problems that
exceeds time or memory limit. This represents the problems which are complex
enough such that running reduction on them are prohibitively expensive. For
each transparency level, the problems it fails on are excluded when computing
its statistics. “#10× increase” is the number of problems whose size increases
to at least 10× its original size after reduction. Therefore, “#10× increase +
     Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers            39

#Fails” roughly corresponds to the problems that become much harder to prove
after reducing with the given transparency level. According to “#10× increase +
#Fails”, both the default and all level produce unacceptable results on at least
50% of the theorems, while for reducible it’s less than 10%. This suggests that
we should not reduce the input problem with default or all level, and therefore
should handle the definitional equality problem using other methods.



K       Experiment on Duper


We conduct a small-scale experiment to compare the performance of Duper with
and without Lean-auto. We use the same 512 Mathlib4 theorems in Appendix I,
and generate their corresponding problems in the same way. We use Lean 4’s
deterministic timeout mechanism for resource control and set the timeout option
“maxHeartbeats” to 65536. The option “auto.mono.ignoreNonQuasiHigherOrder”
of Lean-auto is set to “true”. As explained in Appendix L, we employ Experi-
mental Setup 1 in this experiment.


                                        Solved         Avg Time(ms)
                    With Lean-auto    189(36.9%)          1375.7
                    Without Lean-auto 42(8.2%)            1856.3


               Fig. 9. Comparison of Duper with and without Lean-auto.



   We see that when Duper is used without Lean-auto, it only solves 8.2% of
the problems, and it is slower on solved problems compared to “Duper with
Lean-auto”. Duper also exhibits unexpected behaviors during the experiment.
We find that Duper gets stuck on 7 of the 512 problems for more than 5 min-
utes. Moreover, we find that Duper spends 1741174 heartbeats on the theorem
“MeasureTheory.Lp.simpleFunc.isDenseEmbedding” before failing, which vastly
exceeds our limit 65536. We suspect that in these cases, Duper runs into code
not controlled by Lean 4’s deterministic timeout mechanism.
   When we attempted full-scale evaluation of “Duper without Lean-auto” on
Mathlib4, we found similar issues. Duper gets stuck on problems for minutes
and even hours. Manually recording these problems and filtering them out would
require significant manual work.41 Therefore, we decided to not include “Duper
without Lean-auto” in our full-scale evaluation.

41
     Similar issues are also present when evaluating other tools, but are much less pro-
     nounced compared to “Duper without Lean-auto”. Therefore, we were able to man-
     ually filter out these problems.
40      Y. Qian et al.

L    Details on Theorem Proving Experiments

Multiple experiments in this paper involve running Lean-auto or existing tools
on Lean 4 theorems. Here, we present technical details of experimental setups
used in these experiments.
   All the tools we evaluate, including Lean-auto and existing tools, are imple-
mented as tactics in Lean 4. Each tactic in Lean 4 has a user-facing syntax and an
underlying tactic function. To invoke a tactic, users can input the syntax of the
tactic in Lean 4, potentially with extra information (such as a list of premises).
Lean 4 will elaborate the syntax and call the underlying tactic function.
   A straightforward way to evaluate a tactic tac on a list Ts of Mathlib4
theorems is shown as Experimental Setup 1 in Figure 10.


         To run a tactic tac on a list Ts of Mathlib4 theorems:

          1. Import the entire Mathlib4
          2. For each theorem T in Ts, collect all the theorems h1 , . . . , hn
             used in the proof of T . Then, call the underlying tactic function
             of tac on the statement of T and record the result. If tac accepts
             premises, supply h1 , . . . , hn as the list of premises to the under-
             lying tactic function.



                             Fig. 10. Experimental Setup 1



    However, Experimental Setup 1 is unfair because it favors simp_all and
aesop. This is related to the fact that these two tactics have access to theorems
tagged with the “simp” attribute. Suppose a theorem T in Mathlib4 is tagged
with “simp”. If we run simp_all on T after importing Mathlib4, then simp_all
will have access to the “simp”-tagged T , which might cause it to find a proof of
T that uses T itself.
    Therefore, we would like to make sure that a theorem T is not already tagged
with “simp” when we run evaluation on T . A way to achieve this is to retrieve
the Lean 4 file that declares T , execute all the commands before the declaration
of T , then run evaluation on the statement of T . This makes sure that T is not
declared (thus not marked with “simp”) when we run evaluation on it.
    However, this method causes another problem. There are commands in Lean
4 that simultaneously decare multiple constants c1 , . . . , cn . If there exists i, j such
that ci is a theorem and cj occurs in the statement of ci , then running evaluation
using the above method on ci will cause an “unknown constant” error, because
cj is not declared when we run evaluation on the statement of ci . Similarly, if cj
occurs in the proof of ci , then running evaluation using the above method is also
problematic because the not-yet-declared cj would be passed to those tools that
  Lean-auto: An Interface between Lean 4 and Automated Theorem Provers                41

accept premises. Therefore, we would like to filter out theorems whose proof or
type contains constants declared by the same command.
    To make our evaluation more closely resemble real use cases of Lean 4, we
would like to invoke the user-facing syntax of the tactics instead of their underly-
ing functions. This causes some more fails for premise-accepting tactics because
many Mathlib4 proofs use non-user-declared theorems that are inaccessible to
users.
    Our modified evaluation method is presented as Experimental Setup 2 in
Figure 11. We employ a per-file evaluation scheme for better efficiency.


        To run a tactic tac on a Mathlib4 file F :

         1. Retrieve the content of F
         2. For each command C in F :
            (a) Record the environment E before executing C. E contains
                all the constants declared by commands prior to C.
            (b) Run command C and record the constants c1 , . . . , cn declared
                by it.
            (c) Record the environment E ′ .
            (d) Set the environment to E. This effectively removes c1 , . . . , cn
                from the environment.
            (e) For each 1 ≤ i ≤ n, if ci is a theorem and does not contain
                cj (1 ≤ j ≤ n) in its proof or type:
                   i. Collect all the theorems h1 , . . . , hn used in the proof of
                      ci
                  ii. Create the syntax S that invokes tac on ci . If tac accepts
                      premises, h1 , . . . , hn should be supplied to tac in the
                      syntax.
                 iii. Run Lean 4 on S and record the result.
            (f) Set environment to E ′ . This adds back constants declared by
                C, which is necessary to the execution of later commands.



                            Fig. 11. Experimental Setup 2


    The experiments in Sect. 8 employ Experimental Setup 2. For other small-
scale experiments in our paper, we use Experimental Setup 1. This is because
these small-scale experiments do not involve simp_all and aesop, and Experi-
mental Setup 1 is a cleaner evaluation method compared to Experimental Setup
2.
    Now, we discuss details of resource limit and benchmark generation.

Resource Limit: For efficiency reasons, we would like each Lean 4 process to
test multiple problems (instead of one problem per process). Lean 4 does not
support setting time limit or memory limit for native code. Instead, it provides
42      Y. Qian et al.

a resource control mechanism called deterministic timeout, which is controlled
by the “maxHeartbeats” option. The deterministic timeout mechanism counts
the number of times a low-level Lean 4 function is called, and interrupts the
program if it exceeds “maxHeartbeats”.
   In the experiments in Sect. 8, we mentioned that all the tools are given a time
limit of 10 seconds. For native Lean 4 tools, including “rfl”, “simp_all”, “Aesop”
and “Lean-auto + Duper”, we set “maxHeartbeats” to 65536, which we have
found to roughly correspond to 10 seconds in our experiments. For “Lean-auto
+ TPTP/SMT Solver”, we set “maxHeartbeats” to 65536 for Lean-auto’s native
Lean 4 code, and set timeout to 10 seconds for TPTP and SMT Solvers. Note
that the setups are not imposing a strict 10 seconds limit on any of the tools.
Therefore, we also record the total execution time of each tool on each problem,
and problems that takes more than 10 seconds to solve are counted as fails.
   Note that the above discussion only applies to Sect. 8. For other small-scale
experiments in our paper, since they do not involve external solvers, we set
“maxHeartbeats” to a fixed value without imposing extra time or memory limits.


Benchmark Generation: Either of Experimental Setup 1 or Experimental
Setup 2 naturally gives rise to a benchmark generation method. For Experimental
Setup 1, the corresponding benchmark set is all the user-declared Mathlib4 the-
orems42 in the environment after importing Mathlib4, which amounts to 178026
theorems. For Experimental Setup 2, the corresponding benchmark set is all the
user-declared theorems generated by the commands (in the Mathlib4 files) exe-
cuted during the experiment. We find a slight difference (around 100 theorems)
in the benchmark sets generated by Experimental Setup 2 when testing different
tools. This is potentially due to issues related to individual tools.43
    In the experiments in Sect. 8, the benchmark set we use is the intersection of
the above two benchmark sets. For each Mathlib4 file F , we record both the set
of theorems from F after importing the entire Mathlib4 and the set of theorems
generated by executing commands in F , then compute the intersection of the two
sets. This gives a total of 176904 theorems. After filtering out the 27762 theorems
whose proof or type contains constants declared in the same command, our final
benchmark set consists of 149142 theorems.
    Note that the above benchmark generation method only applies to Sect. 8.
For our small-scale experiment, we randomly sample from user-declared Math-
lib4 theorems in the environment after importing Mathlib4.



42
   A constant is a Mathlib4 constant iff it is declared by a .lean file in Mathlib4. Note
   that the environment after importing Mathlib4 also contains constants declared in
   libraries that Mathlib4 depend on.
43
   Note that in Experimental Setup 2, execution of tools interleave with execution of
   commands in Mathlib4 files, and execution of commands produce constants, which
   are then filtered to produce the benchmark set. If the tool crashes or causes other
   side effects, it could affect the constants produced by the commands.
