Optimized Encodings of Fragments of Type
Theory in First Order Logic
Tanel Tammet and Jan M. Smith
Department of Computing Science,
Chalmers University of Technology and Univ. of Goteborg,
S-41296 Goteborg, Sweden.
e-mail: ftammet, smithg@cs.chalmers.se

Abstract. The paper presents sound and complete translations of sev-

eral fragments of Martin-Lof's monomorphic type theory to rst order
predicate calculus. The translations are optimised for the purpose of
automated theorem proving in the mentioned fragments. The implementation of the theorem prover Gandalf and several experimental results
are described.

1 Introduction
The subject of this paper is the problem of automated theorem proving in
Martin-Lof's monomorphic type theory [16, 8], which is the underlying logic
of the interactive proof development system ALF [2, 11].
In the scope of our paper the task of automated theorem proving in type
theory is understood as demonstrating that a certain type is inhabited by constructing a term of that type. The problem of inhabitedness of a type A is
understood in the following way: given a list of judgements (these may be
constant declarations, explicit de nitions and de ning equalities), nd a term a
such that a 2 A is derivable from . The term a is explicitly constructed and,
hence, the judgement a 2 A can be checked by ALF.
Direct usage of type theory for automated reasoning poses serious problems
due to the higher-order nature of the theory, requiring the use of higher-order
uni cation. Since the latter is undecidable, theorem provers for higher-order logics use either an incomplete uni cation procedure or special incremental techniques. However, it is often the case that large parts of the theories represented
in the type framework are essentially rst-order. We argue that in such cases
it is advantageous to use rst-order techniques, due to the higher eciency of
specialised rst order proof search methods as compared to methods usable in
the general higher-order case.
We consider the question of axiomatizing the problem of inhabitedness of a
type as a formula both in the Horn fragment of the standard rst-order logic
(where classical and intuitionistic logic coincide) and in full rst-order intuitionistic logic, denoted later by F1 and F2 . The presented translations are shown to
be sound and complete.

Translations of Martin-Lof's type theory to theories based on predicate logic
have been considered earlier by Aczel [1] and Smith [17], but with purposes different from automated theorem proving. Our translation is also similar to the
translation given by Felty and Miller [9] of the logical framework LF to the
logic hh! of hereditary Harrop formulas with quanti cation at all non-predicate
types. However, our work di ers from theirs in that we consider translations of
fragments of type theory into rst order logic and that our main interest is in
optimizing the translation for enhancing the eciency of automated proof search
for the problem of inhabitedness.
While it is not realistic to expect that fully automated methods will manage most of the hard tasks in theorem-proving, we believe that the automated
methods can be used as a powerful tool when developing proofs interactively in
a proof sytem like ALF. T. Tammet has implemented a resolution-based theorem prover for the fragments F1 and F2 described in the paper. The prover
takes advantage of the optimised translations we introduce and is designed for
use together with the system ALF, which incorporates the pattern-matching extension of the underlying monomorphic type theory [8, 11]. Pattern-matching is
implemented in the special part of the prover devoted to searching for structural
induction proofs.
The paper is structured as follows: the sections 2 and 3 give a brief overview
of Martin-Lof's type theory and the resolution method. Section 4 is the central
part of the paper, starting with the basic translation to the Horn fragment of
rst order predicate calculus and nally introducing our optimisations to the
translation. Section 5 describes the implementation of the equality predicate
and section 6 extends the translation from Horn clauses to the full intuitionistic
logic. Finally, section 7 presents experiments with the implementation.

2 Martin-Lof's Type Theory
In type theory we can form judgements of the forms

{ A type, A is a type,
{ A = B, A and B are equal types,
{ a 2 A, a is an object in the type A,
{ a = b 2 A, a and b are equal objects in the type A.
In general, a judgement is made in a context, i.e., a list of assumptions x1 2
A1 ; : : :; xn 2 An where for j  n, Aj may depend on x1; : : :; xj 1.
There are basically two ways of introducing types in Martin-Lof's type theory: function types and inductively de ned sets. Because of the possibility of
introducing sets by induction, type theory is an open theory; it is in this sense
that the theory may serve as a logical framework.
We denote the type of sets by Set. Given a set A we may form the type El(A)
2 Set We will write A instead of
of its elements; hence we have the rule ElA(A)
type

El(A), since it will always be clear from the context whether we mean A as a set
(i.e., as an object in Set) or as a type.

If A is a type and B is a family of types for x 2 A, then we can form the
type of functions (x 2 A)B from A to B.
A type B type [x 2 A]
(x 2 A)B type
All free occurrences of x in B become bound in (x 2 A)B. Given a function in
(x 2 A)B we may apply it on an object in A:
c 2 (x 2 A)B a 2 A
c(a) 2 B fa=xg
where B fa=xg denotes the result of substituting a for all free occurances of x in
B. A basic way of forming functions is by abstraction:
b 2 B [x 2 A]
[x]b 2 (x 2 A)B
A function applied on an object is de ned by the ordinary -rule.
a 2 A b 2 B [x 2 A]
([x]b)(a) = bfa=xg 2 B fa=xg
We also have the usual -, - and -rules as well as substituition rules. We
will often use the notation (A)B when B does not contain any free occurrences
of x. In order to increase the readability, we will write (x1 2 A1 ; : : :; xn 2 An )B
instead of (x1 2 A1) : : :(xn 2 An )B and b(a1 ; : : :; an) instead of b(a1 ) : : :(an ).
Similarly, we will write [x1] : : :[xn]e as [x1; : : :; xn]e.
The generality of type theory as a logical framework comes from the possibilities of introducing new constants. It is in this way that we can introduce the
usual mathematical objects like natural numbers, functions, tuples etc. as well
as sets expressing propositions. There are two kinds of constants: primitive and
de ned.
A set is de ned by its introduction rules, i.e., by giving a collection of primitive constants with appropriate types. For example, the set of natural numbers
is de ned by declaring the constants N 2 Set, 0 2 N,
succ 2 (N)N.
A de ned constant can either be explicitly or implicitly de ned. We declare an
explicitly de ned constant c by giving a de nition of it: c = a 2 A For instance,
we can make the following explicit de nitions: 1 = succ(0) 2 N, IN = [x]x 2 (N)N
and de ne I = [A; x]x 2 (A 2 Set; A)A as the monomorphic identity function
which when applied to an arbitrary set A yields the identity function on A.
We declare an implicitly de ned constant by showing what de niens it has
when we apply it to its arguments. An implicit de nition may be recursive. The
implicit constant +, expressing addition of natural numbers, is introduced by
+ 2 (N; N)N; +(0; y) = y, +(succ(x); y) = succ(+(x; y)).

The de nition of + is an example of an implicit constant de ned by patternmatching on the possible constructors of the set N. In Martin-Lof's original
formulation, implicitely de ned constants were only possible to introduce by
primitive recursion schemes. We will, however, use the more general formulation
with pattern-matching, proposed by Coquand [7]. For our approach to automated theorem proving in type theory, pattern-matching is important since it
often makes it possible to avoid higher order functions.
A basic idea of type theory is the so called Curry-Howard correspondence
between propositions and sets: a proposition is represented as the set of its
proofs. Hence, the type of propositions is identi ed with the type Set. Variables
are used as names of assumptions and constants are used as rules. To apply a rule
to a number of subproofs is done by applying a constant to the corresponding
subproof objects.
A theory is presented by a list of typings and de nitions of constants. When
we read the constant as a name of a rule, then a primitive constant is usually a
formation or introduction rule, an implicitly de ned constant is an elimination
rule (with the contraction rule expressed as the step from the de niendum to
the de niens) and nally, an explicitly de ned constant is a lemma or derived
rule.

3 The Resolution Calculus
We will de ne some standard notions of the resolution method, restricting us
to the Horn fragment where classical and intuitionistic provability coincide. For
further details see, for example, [6] or [4].
An atom is a predicate symbol applied to zero or more terms. A positive
literal is an atom. A negative literal is an atom preceded by the negation sign. A
clause is a nite set of literals. All variables in a clause are interpreted as being
universally quanti ed. In classical logic a clause fL1 ; L2; : : :; Lng is interpreted
as the disjunction L1 _ L2 _ : : : _ Ln. A clause, literal, atom or a term is said
to be ground if it contains no variables. A clause is said to be a singleton clause
if it only contains a single literal. A Horn clause is a clause which contains at
most one positive literal. We will often write Horn clauses as sequents, since this
interpretation suits intuitionistic logic; a sequent L1; : : :; Ln ) L is considered
to be the same as a clause f:L1; : : :; :Ln; Lg.
New clauses are derived by the rule of hyperresolution
L1 ; : : :; Ln ) L ) L01
: : : ) L0n  = mgu(L ; L0 ) : : :mgu(L ; L0 )
1 1
n n
) L
where mgu(L; L0 ) denote the most general uni er of the terms or literals L
and L0 .

4 Translating Non-Nested Function Types
In this section we will consider the fragment F1 of type theory which corresponds
to Horn clauses. Our goals are:

1. give a sound and complete translation of the fragment F1 to Horn clauses,
2. optimise the translation for the purposes of automated theorem proving,
keeping soundness and completeness,
3. extend the translation to a wider fragment than F1 , taking full rst order
intuitionistic logic as target logic.
A function type is a type of the form (x1 2 A1; : : :; xn 2 An)B, where n > 0.
De nition A type C belongs to the type fragment F1 if either C does not contain
function types or C has the form (x1 2 A1; : : :; xn 2 An)B where none of Ai and
B is or contains a function type.
We say that a judgement belongs to the judgement fragment F1 if the type
of the judgement belongs to F1 . When we speak about the fragment F1 in the
following, it will always be clear from the context whether we mean the type
fragment or the judgement fragment.
Example 1. The type (X 2 Set; x 2 X; y 2 X)X, corresponding to the implication
X ! (X ! X), is in F1 . The type (X 2 Set; x 2 X; y 2 (z 2 X)X)X, corresponding
to X ! ((X ! X) ! X) contains a function type (z 2 X)X in its third argument,
thus it is not in the fragment F1 .

4.1 Translating Judgements and the Goal

We use a two-place rst-order predicate In and a rst-order equality predicate
= to translate judgements.
The intended meaning of In(a; A) is that the term a is an element of the set
denoted by the term A, i.e., a 2 A. Each judgement in F1 is encoded as a clause
in the Horn fragment of rst-order logic without quanti ers. All the ( rst-order)
variables in a clause are understood as being universally quanti ed.
{ Application terms. An application term a  f(g1 ; : : :; gn) is translated
by full uncurrying. So, in case f is a composite term h(l1 ; : : :; lk ), then one
step of uncurrying gives a term h(l1 ; : : :; lk ; g1; : : :; gn) for a. For instance,
the term f (x; y)(g(x)) is translated as f(x; y; g(x)).
Notice that in the fragment F1, all the occurrences of a function symbol in
the translated terms will have the same number of arguments. The last fact
justi es the syntactic correctness of the translation into rst-order language
without an extra layer of encoding for application terms.
{ Expressions declaring primitive constants. A primitive constant f 2
(x1 2 A1 ; : : :; xn 2 An )B such as suc 2 (N)N is translated as the clause
In(x1 ; A01); : : :; In(xn ; A0n) ) In(f(x1 ; : : :; xn); B 0 ), where each xi is a variable, f is a constant symbol, A0i and B 0 are translations of Ai and B, respectively.
The only variables in the resulting clause are xi (1  i  n). Notice that in
the translation of an expression in the fragment F1, the leftmost symbol of
each subterm is a function symbol. This justi es the syntactic correctness of
the translation into rst-order language.

{ Expressions de ning implicit constants. The de nition f(t1 ; : : :; tn) =
g(h1 ; : : :; hk ); of an implicit constant f, is translated as the clause ) F 0 =

G0, where F 0 and G0 are translations of f(t1 ; : : :; tn) and g(h1 ; : : :; hk ), respectively.
{ Explicit de nitions and equality of types. Explicit de nitions c = a 2 A
and judgements of the form A = B where A and B are types are not translated at all. Instead, all the type theory expressions containing occurrences
of the left side c of some explicit de nition or the left side A of an asserted
equality of types are normalized by expanding the de nition and reducing
the resulting redexes before doing the translation.
{ The inhabitedness problem: Given a list of judgements , show the
inhabitedness of a type G  (x1 2 A1; : : :; xn 2 An)B. We are moreover only
interested in the case when B is not the constant Set.
In order to avoid n explicit abstraction steps in the nal part of the derivation, we use the pattern-matching formulation of the abstraction term inhabiting G. Thus we assume that G is a type of a (new) implicitly de ned
constant g. The constant g is essentially the name of the function term we
use instead of the explicit lambda-term x1 ; : : :; xn:t. Our goal is to construct a term t (corresponding to the body of the abstraction term) for the
right hand side of the equation g(x1; : : :; xn) = t which de nes a function
inhabiting G.
Let   fc1 =xn; : : :; cn=xng be a substitution replacing the variables in G by
new constant symbols (Skolem constants) c1 ; : : :; cn not occurring anywhere
in G or in any of the judgements in . The goal will be encoded as the
problem of deriving a substitution instance of the clause ) In(x; B 0 ) from
the set of clauses 0 [ E [ A0 , where B 0 is the translation of B, 0 is the set
of translations of all the elements of , E is the standard axiomatization of
equivalence and substitutivity of equality for 0 [ A0 [ B 0 , and A0 is the set
of clauses
) In(c1 ; A01); : : :; ) In(cn ; A0n);
where each A0i is a translation of Ai . The variable x in ) In(x; B 0 ) is the
variable to be uni ed, i.e., at the place of x we will obtain the inhabiting
term. The operation of replacing the variables in G by the new constants is
a speci c instance of the Skolemization procedure and, unlike full Skolemization, is correct for intuitionistic logic, see [12] and [13].
A substitution instance of ) In(x; B 0 ) is derivable from the set 0 [ E [ A0
if and only if the clause set 0 [ E [ A0 [fIn(x; B 0 ) )g is refutable. We will
say that the translation of the goal type G is the clause set A0 [fIn(x; B 0) )
g [ E 0, where E 0 is the set of equality substitution axioms for the function
symbols in A [ B.
There are well-known techniques enabling us to always construct the required
substitution instance of ) In(x; B 0 ) from the resolution refutation of Horn
clause sets like 0 [ E [ A0 [ fIn(x; B 0) )g; see [6] and [5]. It is easy to
see that any refutation from a Horn clause set where In(x; B 0 ) ) is a
single clause containing no positive literals will end with the hyperresolution

step with premisses being the input clause In(x; B 0 ) ) and some derived
clause ) In(t; r). Due to the speci c form of the clause sets obtained by
the translations of type theory judgements, the terms t and r will moreover
always be ground.
After nding the refutation we thus have an instance of the clause )
In(x; B 0 ) with a ground term t replacing the variable x. The function body
g is built of t by replacing the Skolem constant symbols c1 ; : : :; cn in t by
the variables x1; : : :; xn, respectively.
Example 2. In this example, we introduce an inductively de ned predicate Leq,
expressing the less than or equal relation on the natural numbers (we will add
numbers for easier reference).
N 2 Set
02N
s 2 (x 2 N)N
Leq 2 (x; y 2 N)Set
leq0 2 (x 2 N)Leq(0; x)
leqs 2 (x; y 2 N; z 2 Leq(x; y))Leq(s(x); s(y))

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
We denote these declarations by . Consider the task of nding a term
inhabiting the following type C:
(x 2 N)Leq(s(0); s(s(s(x))))
The translation T r( ) of is the following clause set:
1: ) In(N; Set)
2: ) In(0; N)
3: In(x; N) ) In(s(x); N)
4: In(x; N); In(y; N) ) In(Leq(x; y); Set)
5: In(x; N) ) In(leq0 (x); Leq(0; x))
6: In(x; N); In(y; N); In(z; Leq(x; y)) ) In(leqs (x; y; z); Leq(s(x); s(y)))
where x, y and z are the only variables. The translation of the goal is the following
clause set C 0:
7: ) In(c; N)
8: In(u; Leq(s(0); s(s(s(c))))) )
where u is a variable and c is a new constant symbol. We want to show that the
clause set T r( ) [ C 0 is refutable and nd a term t such that the set Tr( ) [
C 0ft=ug would also be refutable. Indeed, there exists the following resolution
refutation:
9 (from 3,7): ) In(s(c); N)
10 (from 3,9): ) In(s(s(c)); N)

11 (from 5,10): ) In(leq0 (s(s(c))); Leq(0; s(s(c))))
12 (from 6,2,10,11): ) In(leqs (0; s(s(c)); leq0 (s(s(c)))); Leq(s(0); s(s(s(c)))))
13 (from 8,12): )
giving us the term leqs (0; s(s(c)); leq0 (s(s(c)))) as the required substitution instance for u in In(u; Leq(s(0); s(s(s(c))))). By replacing the new constant c with
a variable x we get the term leqs (0; s(s(x)); leq0 (s(s(x)))) as the body of a function inhabiting the type (x 2 N)Leq(s(0); s(s(s(x)))).
We will below present an optimization leading to a smaller input clause set
which will avoid the explicit derivation of 9, 10 and 11 in the present example.

4.2 Translating Derivation Rules
Type Formation Rules For our purposes, the set of assumptions and the goal

can be assumed to be already correctly formed types. Because the derivation
rules of type theory preserve type correctness, we can ignore type formation
rules without losing soundness.
Notice that our translation preserves the subformula structure. Concerning
completeness, we see that we may ignore type construction rules as long as we
only need types that are syntactically subtypes of the assumptions and the goal.
Since F1 corresponds to a fragment of rst-order logic and since the normal form
of any derivation in rst-order logic has the subformula property, we may, hence,
ignore type construction rules.

The Application rule and the Substitution Rules These are the main

rules for our purposes. It is easy to see that for the fragment F1 the application
rule
c 2 (x 2 A)B a 2 A
c(a) 2 B fa=xg
can be assumed to have a \multiple form" instantiating all the arguments of a
function at once:
c 2 (x1 2 A1; : : :; xn 2 An)B a1 2 A1 : : : an 2 An
c(a1 ; : : :; an) 2 B fa1=x1; : : :; an=xng
Indeed, since in F1 function types do not occur as argument types of functions,
if the result of a single-step application rule is a function, then this function can
only be used as a left premiss of an application rule.
The translated form of the multiple application rule is:
In(x1 ; A1); : : :; In(xn ; An) ) In(c(x1 ; : : :; xn); B)
) In(a
: : :1 ; A1)
) In(an ; An)
) In(c(a1 ; : : :; an); B fa1=x1; : : :; an=xng)

The last rule is an instance of the hyperresolution rule combining multiple
modus ponens with limited substitution { only most general uni ers can be
substituted:
F1; : : :; Fn ) F
) F10 : : : ) Fn0  = mgu(F ; F 0 ) : : :mgu(F ; F 0 )
1 1
n n
) F

4.3 Soundness and Completeness of the Translation
We will denote the result of translating a judgement or a list of judgements A
as T r(A). We will denote the set of clauses obtained by translating a goal type
A as T rg(A).
We will show soundness and completeness of the translation and the hyperresolution calculus with respect to the fragment F1 of type theory. By soundness
we mean that if there is a hyperresolution refutation of Trg(G) [ Tr( ) for a
goal type G and a list of judgements , then there is a term t and type theory
proof of t 2 G from . By completeness we mean that if there is a type theory
proof from showing that some term inhabits a certain type G, then there is a
hyperresolution refutation of Trg(G) [ Tr( ).

Lemma 1. Removing all the equality rules of type theory except -conversion
(see section 2) preserves completeness for the fragment F1 .
Proof. All the equality rules except -conversion are covered by the standard

rst-order axiomatizationof equivalence and substitutivity properties of the rstorder equality predicate.

Lemma 2. The type theory calculus obtained by removing the abstraction rule
and the -conversion rule preserves completeness for the fragment F1.

Proof. It is easy to see that for the fragment F1 the abstraction rule is unnec-

essary. The reason is that F1 corresponds to a fragment of rst-order logic, and
since the latter is cut-free, we have the subformula property, guaranteeing completeness without introducing any assumptions which are not subformulas of the
conclusion.
Since we do not have assumptions, that is, formulas of the form b 2 B[x 2 A] in
the fragment F1, and the abstraction rule is unnecessary, then the -conversion
rule (corresponding to the cut rule in rst-order logic)
a 2 A b 2 B[x 2 A]
((x)b)(a) = bfa=xg2 B fa=xg
is also unnecessary.
The following is the standard lifting lemma of the theory of resolution calculus. (see e.g. [6]):

Lemma 3. Let A and B be two clauses A  fA1 ; : : :; Ang and B 
fB1 ; : : :; Bn g. Let A0 and B 0 be two clauses with the following properties:
A0 = A [ A00 , B 0 = B [ B 00 where  and  are substitutions, A00 and B 00

are arbitrary clauses. Whenever a new clause C 0 can be derived from A0 and
B 0 by resolution, there exists a clause C derivable from A and B such that
C 0 = C [ C 00, where  is a subsitution and C 00 is a clause.

Lemma 4. The hyperresolution rule applied to the translation of type theory
judgements is sound and complete for type theory with only application and substitution as derivation rules.

Proof. The proof of soundness is by induction on the size of derivation. The

base case is immediate. The induction step is also obvious, since every hyperresolution application corresponds to a derivation in type theory containing only
substitutions and applications.
The proof of completeness is also by induction on the size of derivation.
Again, the base case is obvious. For the induction step, assume that we have a
substitution or application in type theory from premisses with conclusion F.
We have to show that there is a corresponding hyperresolution derivation from
the clause set Tr( 0) giving a clause Tr(F 0) such that is a set of substitution
instances of 0 and F is a substitution instance of F 0. The substitution step
is obvious: take the translation of the unchanged premiss of the substitution
derivation. The application step follows from the lifting lemma.

Theorem 5. The translation and hyperresolution are sound and complete with
respect to the fragment F1 of type theory.

Proof. Follows from the previous lemmas in this section.

4.4 Optimizing the Translation
We introduce two optimizations of our translation of the fragment F1 . The optimized translations do not allow to get a proof term directly. However, from
the proof of the optimized translation it is possible to eciently construct the
proof of the unoptimized translation, which gives the required proof term. Such
an algorithm is implemented in our prover Gandalf.

The First Optimization: O1 Let be a list of type theory judgements in the
fragment F1 and let G be a goal type in the fragment F1. Observe that all the
positive singleton clauses in Tr( ) [ Trg(G) are ground and all the variables in
a positive literal of any non-singleton clause C in Tr( ) [ Trg(G) occur as rst
arguments in the negative literals of C. Therefore any nonemtpy clause derived
from T r( ) [ Trg(G) by hyperresolution is a singleton ground clause.

We present an optimization O1 for translations of type theory judgements,
which is crucial for improving the eciency of automated proof search. The point
of O1 is allowing the derivation of non-ground singleton clauses, each covering a

possibly in nite set of ground singleton clauses derivable from the non-optimized
clause set.
The optimization O1 is obtained by replacing all atoms with the binary predicate In by an atom with a unary predicate Inh, always discarding the rst
argument of In.
The encoded goal clause G  ) In(x; B) turns into a ground clause
O1(G)  ) Inh(B). After we have found a rst-order derivation of the clause
O1(G) from the set of optimized assumption clauses O1( ), we construct the
corresponding derivation of a substitution instance of the non-optimized G from
the set of non-optimized assumptions .
Example 3. Consider the set of judgements A obtained by translating the type
theory judgements in example 2. The optimization O1 applied to the clauses in
example 2 will give the following clause set O1(A).
1': ) Inh(Set)
2': ) Inh(N)
3': Inh(N) ) Inh(N)
4': Inh(N); Inh(N) ) Inh(Set)
5': Inh(N) ) Inh(Leq(0; x))
6': Inh(N); Inh(N); Inh(Leq(x; y)) ) Inh(Leq(s(x); s(y)))
7': ) Inh(N)
8': Inh(Leq(s(0); s(s(s(c))))) )
There exists the following resolution refutation from O1(A):
11' (from 2',5'): ) Inh(Leq(0; x)
12' (from 2',2',11',6'): ) Inh(Leq(s(0); s(x)))
13' (from 8',12'): )

The crucial importance of the optimization O1 stands in that whereas hyperresolution derives only ground clauses from the the unoptimised translation,
then from the optimised translation it is possible to derive new clauses containing variables. Such clauses stand for generally in nite sets of ground clauses
derivable from the unoptimised translation.
In the example above, we can derive a non-ground clause )
Inh(leq(s(0); s(x))) from the clauses 2', 5' and 6', covering the in nite set of clauses ) In(p1 ; leq(s(0); s(0))); ) In(p2 ; leq(s(0); s(s(0)))); )
In(p3 ; leq(s(0); s(s(s(0))))); : : :g derivable from A.
We now build a new clause set Ai from the unoptimized clause set A in the
example above by replacing the clause 8 : In(u; leq(s(0); s(s(s(c))))) ) with
the clause 8i : In(u; leq(s(0); si (c))) ) where si (c) stands for the term where s
is applied i times. The shortest hyperresolution refutation of Ai consists of i + 3
hyperresolution steps. The shortest hyperresolution refutation of O1(Ai ) consists
always of 3 steps, regardless of i. Due to the optimization we avoid deriving the
previously necessary sequent ) In(si (c); N).

Let be a clause set in the fragment F1, let G be a goal type in F1. Tr( )
is a translated form of and Trg(G) is the translated form of G. O1(Tr( )) is
the optimized form of Tr( ).
For the simplicity of presentation we will assume that equality is not present
in or G and that Trg(G) consists of a sole negative singleton clause. The case
with the equality will be treated later in Section 5. It is always possible to reformulate G and as G0 and 0 by assuming that all the positive singleton clauses
in the original Trg(G) are members of Tr( 0). The reformulated Trg(G0 ) then
consists of a sole negative singleton clause, which can be used in the hyperresolution refutation of Tr( 0) [ Trg(G0 ) only for the last inference, the derivation
of the empty clause.

Soundness and completeness of the optimization O1 The rst order

language of Tr( ) is not typed. However, due to the construction of Tr( ),
all the terms occurring in the clauses of Tr( ) can be seen as being typed by .
Every variable x occuring in a clause C in Tr( ) occurs in a literal In(x; tx ) in
C, corresponding to a judgement x 2 tx in .
In the following we consider all the variables, constants, function symbols and
terms (brie y: objects) in Tr( ) to be typed. The type of an object in Tr( ) is
determined by . The type of an object in O1(Tr( )) is the same as the type
of a corresponding object in Tr( ). A term t constructed from objects in Tr( )
is type-correct i the term t0 corresponding to t in type theory is type-correct in
the context of .
By  `h C we denote that a clause C is derivable from the clause set  by
hyperresolution. Since any clause C such that Tr( ) `h C is ground, it is easy
to see that C is type-correct.
Di erently from Tr( ), it is possible to derive non-ground clauses from
O1 (T r( )). We extend the notion of type-correctness to clauses C such that
O1 (T r( )) `h C. Each variable x occurring in C can be traced (renaming
taken into account) through the derivation tree of C to the occurrence of some
variable y in O1(Tr( )). Thus we can say that it has a type of the variable y
and we will extend the notion of type-correctness to the clauses derived from
O1 (T r( )).

Lemma 6. Consider a variable x occurring inside O1 (Tr( )). Either x occurs

as an argument of the predicate Inh, in which case it has a universal type Set or
x is an argument ai of some term f(a1 ; : : :; an) occurring inside O1(Tr( )). In
the last case the type of x is determined by the function symbol f , the position
i of ai in the term and and a subset of arguments   fa1; : : :; ang such that
ai 62 . There exists a re exive ordering d of the elements of fa1; : : :; ang,
such that whenever ak d al (1  k; l  n), the type of al cannot depend on the
type of ak .
Proof. Follows from the rules of monomorphic type theory as a syntactic prop-

erty.

Theorem7. The optimization O1 preserves soundness and completeness.
Proof. Let

be a clause set in the fragment F1, let Tr( ) be a translated form
of and let O1(T r( )) be the optimized form of Tr( ).
Completeness:if Tr( ) `h C holds, then there is such a clause C 0 and such
a substitution  that C = C 0 and O1 (Tr( )) `h O1 (C 0) holds. Consequently,
if T r( ) [ T rg(G) is refutable, then O1 (Tr( )) [ O1(Trg(G)) is refutable.
The proof is easy, since O1 does nothing but removes the rst argument of
each predicate symbol. Let D be a hyperresolution derivation of C from Tr( ).
Construct a new derivation D0 by removing the rst arguments from each occurrence of the predicate Inh in D and replacing Inh with In. Then D0 is a
substitution instance of a derivation giving O1(C 0 ) from O1(Tr( )). Therefore,
due to the completeness of hyperresolution, O1(Tr( )) `h O1(C 0 ) holds.
Soundness: If O1(Tr( )) `h C holds, then C is type-correct.
Hence (due to the completeness of Tr( ) for type theory), if O1(Tr( )) [
O1(T rg(G)) is refutable, then Tr( ) [ Trg(G) is refutable.
Proof. We use induction over the hyperresolution derivation for the optimized
case. The proof relies on that we are using monomorphic type theory where the
previous lemma holds and that any applied substitution is a most general uni er
of two existing terms.
Base case: obvious.
Induction step. Consider the hyperresolution rule:
L1 ; : : :; Ln ) L ) L01 : : : ) L0n  = mgu(L ; L0 ) : : :mgu(L ; L0 )
1 1
n n
) L
The literal L has a form Inh(r). The induction step is proved by showing that
r, hence also L, is type-correct.
The proof is by induction over the substitution  which is ordered by the dependency ordering d . Base case is obvious, we proceed to proving the induction
step.
As an induction hypothesis we assume that there is a subset  of  such
that r is type-correct and for each fs=vg in  and fp=ug in   holds v d
u. Essentially, we construct the substitution by starting from the d -smallest
variables and proceeding according to the ordering d .
An element t=x of   is obtained by unifying a variable x in a literal Li 
with the term t in L0i , where   . We have:
8u; p; v; s:(fp=ug  ( ) & fs=vg  ) ) u d v
The variable x either occurs as a sole argument in the literal Inh(x), in which
case x has a universal type Set or as an argument ai of some surrounding term
f(a1 ; : : :; an).
In the rst case also t occurs as a sole argument of Inh(t), the type of t is
Set and thus rft=xg is type-correct.
Consider the second case. Here also the term t occurs as an i-th argument of
a surrounding term f(a01 ; : : :; a0n). Both the leading function symbol f and the

position index i in the surrounding term are the same for x and t. Thus either
both the types of x and t do no depend on other terms or they both depend
on a subset of arguments in the surrounding term. Consider the case where the
types of x and t do not depend on other terms. In that case the type of t is the
same as the type of x and thus rft=xg is type-correct.
Consider the case where the types of x and t depend on other terms. Due
to the previous lemma all these depended-upon terms form a subset of pairwise
corresponding arguments D of f(a1 ; : : :; an) and D0 of f(a01 ; : : :; a0n). The previous lemma shows that there exists a dependency ordering d so that the types
of the elements of D and D0 do not depend on the types of x and t. Thus we
can assume that D = D0 = D = D0 , i.e, the terms corresponding to D and
D0 in Li and L0i are already uni ed by . Hence the type of t in L0i  is the same
as the type of x in Li , thus rft=xg is type-correct.
Observe that in some sense the unrestricted substitution rule (i.e. a substitution rule which uses arbitrary substitutions, not only these obtained by
uni cation) would make the optimized calculus unsound in respect to the type
theory, although the refutability of a set O1(Tr( )) with unrestricted substitution added as a derivation rule would still be equivalent to the refutability of
T r( ).

The Second Optimization: O2 The second optimization O2 is applicable only
to such clause sets which have been already optimized by O1. O2 is obtained by
removing certain clauses and some atoms on the left sides of other clauses. It
is essentially a preprocessing phase pre-applying obvious hyperresolution steps
and removing redundant clauses and literals.
De nition We say that a type f 2 (x1 2 A1; : : :; xn 2 An)Set is essentially
independent in a given list of judgements i it can be shown that f(x1 ; : : :; xn)
is inhabited for any substitution  such that f(x1 ; : : :; xn) is correctly formed
regarding types. We will call such f an essentially independent constructor
For example, the special type Set, the type of natural numbers N 2 Set,
0 2 N,
s 2 (x 2 N)N and the parameterized list type List 2 (x 2 Set)Set,
nil 2 (x 2 Set)List(x), cons 2 (x 2 Set; y 2 x; z 2 List(x))List(x) are easily shown
to be essentially independent. As a negative example, the type Leq used in the

previous examples is not essentially independent.
The optimization O2 takes a set of assumptions of the form given by the
optimization O1 . It returns a modi ed set of assumptions and the goal where for
any input judgement clause s  Inh(A1 ); : : :; Inh(Am ) ) Inh(B) the following
is done:
{ if B is a composite term with an essentially independent constructor as a
leading function symbol, remove the clause s.
{ remove any premiss Inh(Ai) such that Ai has an essentially independent
constructor as a leading function symbol.

Example 4. Take the O1-optimized clause set S from the example 3. You may

also want to look at the original untranslated list of type theory judgements and
the goal in the example 2. The result of the optimization S2 applied to S is the
following set of three clauses:
5": ) Inh(Leq(0; x))
6": Inh(Leq(x; y)) ) Inh(Leq(s(x); s(y)))
8": Inh(Leq(s(0); s(s(s(c))))) )
The last clause set has a short refutation:
1 (from 6", 5") ) Inh(Leq(s(0); s(x))
2 (from 8", 1) )
In case the type term A in the goal clause G ) Inh(A) has an essentially
independent leading function symbol, then the problem of constructing an element of A reduces to the simple problem of using the procedure of checking
essential independency for constructing an element of A.
Soundness and completeness of the optimization O2 follow from the de nition
of essentially independent types.

5 Building In Equality
For the Horn fragment where the translation of the F1 class belongs, the explicit
axiomatization of the equality predicate (except the re exivity axiom x = x
which must be preserved) can be replaced by the following restricted form of
paramodulation without losing completeness (see eg. [10]).
) L[t] ) t0 = g  = mgu(t; t0 )
) L[g]
where L[g] is obtained by replacing one occurrence of the term t in L[t] by the
term g. The term t (the term paramodulated into) in the paramodulation rule is
prohibited to be a variable. The equality predicate in the rule is assumed to be
commutative, i.e., t0 = g is the same as g = t0 .
The de nitional equality predicate = in type theory extended with patternmatching (as in Alf) is always assumed to de ne a terminating and con uent
rewrite relation E. Thus we do not lose completeness in case we treat such
equality axioms as rewrite rules, ie. if we rewrite any term in any derived rstorder clause modulo the rewriting relation E. See [10]). However, we will still
need to keep the paramodulation rule to guarantee completeness.
The soundness and completeness of using the paramodulation (or rewrite
rules) for the O1-optimized translations of type theory judgements is proved analogously to the earlier proof of soundness and completeness of the O1-optimized
translation.
Note that the other type of equality often used in the applications of type
theory, the propositional equality Id, is not de nable in F1. However, we can
build the propositional equality directly into the rst order calculus.

We will use the following special form of the paramodulation rule along with
the re exivity axiom ) Id(A; x; x) instead of the standard equivalence and
substitution rule schemes for Id:
) L[t] ) Id(A; t0 ; g)  = mgu(t; t0 )
) L[g]
where L[g] is obtained by replacing one occurrence of the term t in L[t] by
the term g. The terms t and t0 in the paramodulation rule are prohibited to
be variables. Id is assumed to be commutative, i.e., Id(A; t0; g) is the same as
Id(A; g; t0 ).

6 Translating Nested Function Types
6.1 The General Case
Consider full type theory. We obtain the translation Tri by modifying and extending the translation Tr given for the fragment F1 to the implicational fragment of rst-order intuitionistic logic as a target logic.
{ Application terms. f(g1 ; g2; : : :; gn) is translated as
ap(: : :ap(ap(Tri(f); Tri(g1 )); Tri(g2)); : : :); Tri(gn )), where Tri(t) denotes
the result of the translation of t.
{ Abstraction terms. An abstraction term [x]t is translated by Schon nkel's
abstraction algorithm:
[x]x ! I
[x]M ! ap(K; Tri(M)) if M is a variable or constant, M 6= x.
[x](MN) ! ap(ap(S; [x]Tri(M)); [x]Tri(N)).
where I; S; K are special constants.
{ Type judgements. A judgement t 2 (x 2 A)B is translated as 8x:Tri(x 2
A) ) Tri(ap(t; x) 2 B). A judgement t 2 C where C is not a function
type is translated as Inh(Tri(t); Tri(C)). Constants and variables remain
unchanged by the translation.
{ Goal. The goal G1 ; : : :; Gn `tt? 2 B of nding a term inhabiting B in the
context of judgements G1; : : :; Gn is translated as a formula Tri(G1 ) )
(: : :(T ri(Gn ) ) 9x:Tri(x 2 B)) : : :).
{ Target logic. An implicational fragment of rst-order intuitionistic logic
with the equality predicate plus the standard equalities S= ; K= ; I= for combinators S; K; I: ap(I; x) = x, ap(ap(K; x); y) = x, ap(ap(ap(S; x); y); z) =
ap(ap(x; z); ap(y; z)).
It is known (see [3]) that the Schon nkel's abstraction algorithm combined with
the beforementioned equality rules for S; K; I simulates weak -reduction of
lambda calculus ([x]MN) = M fN=xg but not the  rule: M = M 0 ) [x]M =
[x]M 0.
From the view of automated theorem proving the main problem with using
the equalities S= ; K= ; I= stands in that these equalities signi cantly expand the

search space of proving a type theory goal. In the following we will consider
a fragment where S= ; K= ; I= can be avoided without resorting to higher order
uni cation.

6.2 Translating Types with Independent Nested Function Types
The following fragment F2 is a superset of the previously considered fragment
F1. The motivation for considering F2 stems from the fact that the problems
arising in the general case disappear, but since F2 corresponds to the implicational fragment of full rst-order intuitionistic logic, it is strong enough to allow
synthesis of conditional programs.

De nition An independent function type is a type with the form (x 2 A)B such
that x does not occur in B .
A type C in type theory belongs to the type fragment F2 i C is either not a
function type or it has a form (x 2 A)B such that the following two cases hold:
1. B belongs to the type fragment F2
2. A is not a function type or A is an independent function type and x does
not occur in B .
A type theory judgement C belongs to the judgement fragment F2 if C does not
contain a type outside the type fragment F2.
The translation Tr0 for F2 is obtained from the previously considered translation T ri by applying an optimization O1 (literals of the form In(t; g) are converted to the form Inh(g)). Soundness and completeness proofs of the translation
are obtained from the analogous proofs for the fragment F1. The most convenient way to extend these proofs is to use the resolution method for intuitionistic
logic proposed by G.Mints, see [14] and [15].
In addition to the optimization O1, we will apply the analogue of the optimization O2 to the formula given by the translation Tri.
We note that the introduction and elimination rules for disjunction and conjunction can be de ned in F2. These connectives will be on the di erent level
than implication, but we can enhance the eciency of the prover by building
these connectives into the target logic, much like we can build propositional
equality into target logic.
Since quanti ers cannot be de ned in F2 , we can handle those only by building them into the target logic, ie. considering full intuitionistic logic instead of
the implicational fragment.

7 Experiments with the Implementation
T.Tammet has implemented an automated theorem prover Gandalf, which looks
for type theory proofs in the fragments F1 and F2. It uses all the optimizations
presented in the paper and (for the fragment F1 ) builds the proof term which

can be later checked by the ALF proofchecker. In order to be able to build the
proof term, Gandalf keeps track of all the necessary information while looking
for the rst order proofs. In essence, the proof of the optimized version of the
problem is used for constructing the proof of the unoptimized version, and the
proof term is obtained from the latter.
Gandalf is written in Scheme and compiled to C. The timings presented in
the following are obtained by running Gandalf on a SUN SS-10.
Gandalf takes a le containing type theory judgements and possibly several
goal types, written in ALF syntax. It converts the judgements and goals to
rst order language using the translation and optimizations described in the
previous sections. After that it starts looking for proofs. Gandalf organizes proof
search by iterative deepening on runtime. Suppose the input le contains a list
of judgements and a list of goal types G1; : : :; Gn. Gandalf will take the rst
time limit t1 and allocate t1=n seconds for the attempt to prove G1. In case it
fails, Gandalf will proceed to G2 , etc. In case it succeeds, all the following proof
search subtasks will treat G1 as a judgement, the remaining time from t1 will be
divided between goals G2 ; : : :; Gn and Gandalf will proceed to the next goal G2.
In case a proof search attempt has been conducted for each goal G1; : : :; Gn and
for some of these no proof is found, Gandalf will take a new time limit t2 = f  t1
for some factor f and will perform a new interation for yet unproved goals with
the new time limit t2 .
Consider the task of proving a separate subgoal G: (x1 2 A1 ; : : :; xn 2 An)B.
Gandalf will attempt to use structural induction, i.e., pattern-matching, for proving G. It will consider each argument type Ai in G, nding all these judgements in which are introduction rules for Ai , that is, which are of the form
(y1 2 B1 ; : : :; yn 2 Bm )C with C and Ai being uni able. It will then generate a
set T of di erent proof search tasks for G, each element of T corresponding to a
subset of variables x1; : : :; xn being inducted upon. To every element (induction
case) of the task in T it adds the induction assumptions. Induction assumptions
are generated from the subterms of the pattern of the inductive case at hand.
Only these assumptions are considered which are structurally smaller than the
pattern of the particular induction case.
A certain amount of time will be allocated for proof search for each element
of T . In case Gandalf manages to prove some element E of T , it has found the
proof for G and it will continue with the next open goal from the set G1; : : :; Gn.
Consider the task of proving an element E in the set of proof search tasks
for G. Each such element generally consists of a number of pure rst order proof
tasks R1; : : :; Rk, each Ri corresponding to one case of structual induction. E is
proved only if each of R1; : : :; Rk has been proved.
In case Gandalf nds a proof for some goal Gi, it will construct a sound
type theory proof of Gi, using the ALF syntax. Each inductive case will have
its own separate proof. Each such separate proof is constructed from the proof
found for the corresponding rst order clause set. In order to make this possible,
Gandalf keeps track of all the necessary information while looking for the rst
order proofs.

The current implementation of Gandalf is only able to to construct type
theory proofs for the fragment F1. The part constructing type theory proofs
from the resolution proofs for the intuitionistic fragment F2 is being worked
upon.
Gandalf does not attempt to construct lemmas. Thus it is completely up to
the user to include all the necessary lemmas in the input le. Selecting lemmas
to be proved (and later used for the main proof) is one of the main mechanisms
available to the user in order to guide the blind search of Gandalf.
In addition to the selection of lemmas, there are a number of ags and parameters the user can give to Gandalf in order to guide the proof search. For
example, it is possible to indicate that no induction should be used for a certain
goal or that a certain subset of variables has to be inducted upon, etc.

7.1 Example. Correctness of Toy Compiler

The following example encodes the problem of proving correctness of a simple
compiler. The example is presented in [8] with a proof created by a human user
(C.Coquand) in interaction with the ALF system. We present a proof found by
the Gandalf system using a number of crucial hints given to Gandalf by the
human user.
We want to compute a polynomial expression build of multiplication, addition, basic integers and one variable on a simple stack machine. The instructions
for this machine are:
{ Duplication of the top of the stack.
{ Reversal of the top items on the stack.
{ Replacement of the top items on the stack by an item that is their sum (resp.
product).
{ Replacement of the top item n on the stack by a given item n0.
The problem is to compile a given polynomial expression e(x) to a list l of intructions such that if we execute l on the stack, then the result of this computation
is the stack with the value of the expression e(x) pushed to the top.
The evaluation function is represented as a type theoretic function
Eval 2 (Expr; N)N such that Eval(e; n) gives the value of the expression e when its
unique variable is set equal to value n. The execution function which computes
a nal stack from the input stack and a list of instructions is represented as an
inductively de ned relation EXEC between a list of instructions and two stacks,
re ecting operational semantics. This de nition uses an auxiliary relation Exec
between a single instruction and two stacks.
The proof of the main theorem thm requires a lemma showing that EXEC is
a transitive relation. Gandalf does not attempt to create lemmas automatically,
thus lemma is present in the input le along with the assumption that it is
already proved.
N : Set,

0 : N,

s : (N)N

plus : (N;N)N,

mult : (N;N)N

List : (Set)Set
nil : (t:Set)List(t)
cons : (t:Set; x:t; y:List(t))List(t)
Stack : Set,

null: Stack,

push:(N;r)Stack

Instr : Set
Dup : Instr, Rev : Instr, Add : Instr, Mul : Instr, Lit : (N)Instr
Expr : Set,
Sum : (Expr;Expr)Expr,
Pro : (Expr;Expr)Expr
Num : (N)Expr
Arg : Expr
Eval : (Expr;N)N
Eval(Sum(e1,e2),n)=plus(Eval(e1,n),Eval(e2,n))
Eval(Pro(f1,f2),n)=mult(Eval(f1,n),Eval(f2,n))
Eval(Num(n1),n)=n1
Eval(Arg,n)=n
append : (List(Instr);List(Instr))List(Instr)
append(nil(Instr),x)=x
append(cons(Instr,x,y),z)=cons(Instr,x,append(y,z))
append(x,nil(Instr))=x
Exec : (Instr;Stack;Stack)Set
Exec_Dup : (n:N;r:Stack)
Exec(Dup,push(n,r),push(n,push(n,r)))
Exec_Rev : (n1,n2:N;r:Stack)
Exec(Rev,push(n1,push(n2,r)),push(n2,push(n1,r)))
Exec_Add : (n1,n2:N;r:Stack)
Exec(Add,push(n1,push(n2,r)),push(plus(n1,n2),r))
Exec_Mul : (n1,n2:N;r:Stack)
Exec(Mul,push(n1,push(n2,r)),push(mult(n1,n2),r))
Exec_Lit : (n,m:N;r:Stack)
Exec(Lit(n),push(m,r),push(n,r))
Program = List(Instr)

: Set

EXEC : (Program; Stack; Stack)Set

exec_nil : (r:Stack)EXEC(nil(Instr),r,r)
exec_seq : ( i:Instr; p:Program; r1,r2,r3:Stack;
Exec(i,r1,r2); EXEC(p,r2,r3) )
EXEC(cons(Instr,i,p),r1,r3)
Comp : (e:Expr)Program
Comp(Sum(e1,e2)) =
cons(Instr,
Dup,
append(Comp(e2),
append(cons(Instr,Rev,nil(Instr)),
append(Comp(e1),cons(Instr,Add,nil(Instr))) )))
Comp(Pro(f1,f2)) =
cons(Instr,
Dup,
append(Comp(f2),
append(cons(Instr,Rev,nil(Instr)),
append(Comp(f1),cons(Instr,Mul,nil(Instr))) )))
Comp(Num(n)) =
cons(Instr,Lit(n),nil(Instr))
Comp(Arg) = nil(Instr)

lemma : ( p1,p2:Program; s1,s2,s3:Stack;
EXEC(p1,s1,s2); EXEC(p2,s2,s3) )
EXEC(append(p1,p2),s1,s3)
thm : (e:Expr; r:Stack; n:N)
EXEC(Comp(e),push(n,r),push(Eval(e,n),r))
thm(e,r,n) = ?(forceind(e),noind(r,n),method(both-ends))

The expression thm(e; r; n) =?(forceind(e); noind(r; n); method(both-ends))
gives hints for the search of the proof of thm. The expressions forceind(e) and
noind(r; n) tell Gandalf that it is necessary to use induction on the variable e,
while it is prohibited to use induction on the variables r and n. In case we do
not provide Gandalf with these two hints, it will spend a lot of time attempting
to use induction schemas which are of no use when proving thm, and the proof
is found only after a one-hour search.
The expression method(both-ends) tells Gandalf that it should look for proof
by reasoning from both ends, i.e. doing both forward reasoning and backward
reasoning simultaneously (implemented as binary unit resolution).
Consider the de nition of append used in the formulation of the problem.
The current version of the proof checker ALF does not allow overlapping patterns, thus it fails to type-check the third case append(x; nil(Instr)) = x. How-

ever, this case preserves con uency of the de nition of append . We have preferred to add it to the de nition of append , since the extended rewriting relation clears up a noticeable amount of search space and enables the prover
to nd the proof faster. Alternatively, we could consider proving the equality
Id(List(Instr); append(x; nil(Instr)); x) as a separate lemma, which will have
the same eciency-boosting e ect in case the prover is able to orient this equality
to a rewriting rule.
The following is a proof found by Gandalf. We have deleted ve arguments of
essentially independent type from each application of the functions lemma and
exec seq in order to shorten the proof.
The proof is found in ca two and a half minutes. The rst two induction cases
thm(Sum(x4; x5); r; n) and thm(Pro(x2; x3); r; n) are both proved in one minute
( ve thousand clauses derived, four thousand of these kept), the last two cases
thm(Num(x1); r; n) and thm(Arg; r; n) are proved in a fraction of a second (resp.
21 and 14 clauses derived), half a minute is wasted on an initial attempt to prove
thm(Sum(x4; x5); r; n) with a half-minute time limit.
thm(Sum(x4,x5),r,n) =
lemma(exec_seq(ExecDup(n,r),
thm(x5,push(n,r),n)),
lemma(exec_seq(Exec_Rev(Eval(x5,n),n,r),
thm(x4,push(Eval(x5,n),r),n)),
exec_seq(Exec_Add(Eval(x4,c),Eval(x5,n),r),
exec_nil(push(plus(Eval(x4,n),Eval(x5,n)),r)))))
thm(Pro(x2,x3),r,n) =
lemma(exec_seq(Exec_Dup(n,r),
thm(x3,push(n,r),n)),
lemma(exec_seq(Exec_Rev(Eval(x3,n),n,r),
thm(x2,push(Eval(x3,n),r),n)),
exec_seq(Exec_Mul(Eval(x2,n),Eval(x3,n),r),
exec_nil(push(mult(Eval(x2,n),Eval(x3,n)),r)))))
thm(Num(x1),r,n) =
exec_seq(Exec_Lit(x1,n,r),
exec_nil(push(x1,r)))
thm(Arg,r,n) = exec_nil(push(n,r))

In the example above we instructed Gandalf to use forward reasoning and
backward reasoning simultaneously (implemented as unit resolution). However,
the default strategy of Gandalf is using pure forward reasoning (implemented as
hyperresolution). The latter, while being a good choice for a large class of problems, is ill suited for the current problem. It takes Gandalf almost two hours (de-

riving 337008 clauses) to prove even a single induction case thm(Sum(x4; x5); r; n)
of the general theorem thm(e; r; n) when using pure forward reasoning.
We are planning to implement a heuristic module of Gandalf which would
automatically make choices between reasoning methods.

References
1. Peter Aczel. The strength of Martin-Lof's type theory with one universe. In
Proceedings of the Symposium on Mathematical Logic, Oulu, 1974, pages 1{32.
Report No 2, Department of Philosophy, University of Helsinki, 1977.
2. L. Augustsson, T. Coquand, and B. Nordstrom. A short description of Another
Logical Framework. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Logical Frameworks,
Antibes, pages 39{42, 1990.
3. H. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus. North Holland, 1981.
4. T.Tammet C.Fermuller, A.Leitsch and N.Zamov. Resolution Methods for the Decision Problem, volume 679 of Lecture Notes in Arti cial Intelligence. SpringerVerlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1993.
5. C.Green. Application of theorem-proving to problem solving. In Proc. 1st Internat.
Joint. Conf. Arti cial Intelligence, pages 219{239, 1969.
6. C.L.Chang and R.C.T Lee. Symbolic Logic and Mechanical Theorem Proving.
Academic Press, 1973.
7. Thierry Coquand. Pattern matching with dependent types. In Proceeding from
the logical framework workshop at B
astad, June 1992.
8. Thierry Coquand, Bengt Nordstrom, Jan M. Smith, and Bjorn von Sydow. Type
theory and programming. EATCS, 52, February 1994.
9. A. Felty and D. Miller. Encoding a Dependent-type -Calculus in a Logic Programming Language. In Proceedings of CADE-10. Lecture Notes in Arti cial Intelligence 449, Springer Verlag, 1990.
10. G.Peterson. A technique for establishing completeness results in theorem proving
with equality. SIAM J. of Comput, 12:82{100, 1983.
11. Lena Magnusson. The new Implementation of ALF. In The informal proceeding
from the logical framework workshop at B
astad, June 1992, 1992.
12. D. Miller. Proofs in Higher Order Logics. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon University,
1983.
13. D. Miller. A compact representation of proofs. Studia Logica, 46(4), 1987.
14. G. Mints. Gentzen-type systems and resolution rules. part i. propositional logic.
In COLOG-88, volume 417 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 198{231.
Springer Verlag, 1990.
15. G. Mints. Resolution strategies for the intuitionistic logic. In Constraint Programming, volume 131 of NATO ASI Series F, pages 289{311. Springer Verlag,
1994.
16. Bengt Nordstrom, Kent Petersson, and Jan M. Smith. Programming in MartinLof's Type Theory. An Introduction. Oxford University Press, 1990.
17. Jan Smith. An interpretation of Martin-Lof's type theory in a type-free theory of
propositions. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 49(3):730{753, 1984.

